
12:33 P.M.
Democrats Schedule Vote to Hold William Barr in Contempt

The House Judiciary Committee will vote Wednesday on whether to hold Attorney General William Barr in contempt. Chairman Jerrold Nadler scheduled the vote Monday morning, just after the Justice Department missed a House-imposed deadline to turn over an unredacted version of the Mueller report and its underlying evidence.
The dispute between Nadler and Barr hinges on the attorney general’s refusal to allow the House to see grand jury material in the Mueller report. Barr maintains that he can’t legally turn over grand jury testimony, but Nadler has argued that there’s precedent for giving Congress such testimony.
In a statement, Nadler said Barr has left him with “no choice.”
“The Attorney General’s failure to comply with our subpoena, after extensive accommodation efforts, leaves us no choice but to initiate contempt proceedings in order to enforce the subpoena and access the full, unredacted report,” Nadler said.
He left the door open to postponing Wednesday’s vote if the DOJ “presents us with a good faith offer for access to the full report and the underlying evidence.” But that seems unlikely, given Barr’s willingness to thumb his nose at the committee, including his refusal to show up to testify last week about the Mueller report.
If Nadler goes through with the vote and Democrats choose to hold Barr in contempt, it will be a largely symbolic move serving mostly to escalate the tensions between the Trump administration and congressional Democrats.
Adam K. Raymond

12:12 P.M.
Jerry Falwell Jr. Wants to Extend Trump’s Term by Two Years As ‘Reparations’

If the president in question was anyone else, the suggestion from a prominent supporter, Jerry Falwell Jr., that he was owed an extension of his term as “reparations” for the Mueller investigation could be dismissed as mere rhetorical excess combined with an effort to taunt liberals for their interest in reparations for the descendants of slaves. But because Donald Trump has repeatedly fanned claims that he regards anything that gets in his way — say, an adverse 2020 election — as an extra-constitutional “coup,” it’s not so easy to laugh this off:
The president retweeted this little stink bomb and added his own pithy characterization of the investigation his own administration began:
Mueller aside, Trump has often defended his own chronic assaults on the rule of law by accusing those seeking to restrain him, via lawsuits, congressional investigations, or the constitutionally sanctioned method of impeachment, of defying democratic norms by trying to reverse the results of the 2016 election. And having set a precedent for his own defiance of election results by claiming with zero evidence that “millions of illegal votes” were cast for Hillary Clinton in 2016, Trump echoed Republican allegations (made, again, without evidence) that the GOP’s midterm losses, especially in California, were the result of election fraud:
All in all, it’s not surprising that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi fears anything other that a decisive defeat of Trump in 2020 could lead to a contested election that the incumbent won’t accept unless it keeps him in office, as the New York Times reports:
Pelosi, like Bernie Sanders, is said to consider impeachment as a distraction from the focused, issue-oriented efforts Democrats need to undertake to beat Trump in 2020. But there may be another factor in the back of her mind discouraging the path of impeachment: It would surely be described as a slow-motion coup by Trump and his allies, justifying any counter-measures he chooses. The president is already setting the table for his line of attack:
It’s a wonderfully circular argument: In accusing him of high crimes and misdemeanors, Democrats are violating democratic norms so egregiously that the only way to restore them might be a countercoup of his own. It’s a time-worn rationale for authoritarian measures aimed at “saving” constitutional regimes they overthrow. And even if Trump keeps hinting at it just to mess with the minds of his critics, the effect it has on sycophants like Jerry Falwell Jr. could be unfortunate. The 2020 election could be delegitimized on the right before it even happens.
Ed Kilgore

11:34 A.M.
Humanity Is About to Kill 1 Million Species in a Globe-Spanning Murder-Suicide

Human beings are more prosperous and numerous than we’ve ever been, while the Earth’s other species are dying off faster than at any time in human history.
These two conditions are related. But if the second one persists long enough, we will be following our fellow organisms into the dustbin of geological history.
This is the primary takeaway from a new United Nations report on our planet’s rapidly diminishing biodiversity. Humanity is reshaping the natural world at such scale and rapidity, an estimated 1 million plant and animal species are now at risk of extinction, according to the U.N. assessment. Climate change is a major driver of all this death, but burning fossil fuels is far from our species’ only method of mass ecocide. We are also harvesting fish populations faster than they can reproduce themselves, annually dumping upward of 300 million tons of heavy metals and toxic sludge into the oceans, introducing devastating diseases and invasive species into vulnerable environments as we send people and goods hurtling across the globe, and simply taking up too much space — about 75 percent of the Earth’s land, and 85 percent of its wetlands, have been severely altered or destroyed by human development.
All this plunder has worked out fairly well for us, thus far. But all of our prosperity depends upon the natural world reproducing itself. As the New York Times notes, the U.N. has previously estimated that nature provides the economies of the Americas with $24 trillion worth of non-monetized benefits each year:
For now, we’re still wringing more food out of the Earth than ever before. But we’re also exhausting the ecosystems on which that bounty depends — land degradation is sapping the agricultural productivity of nearly one-quarter of the Earth’s land mass. The mass death of pollinating insects is already jeopardizing $577 billion in annual crop production. The (now virtually inevitable) deaths of major coral reefs, combined with overfishing, will soon remove a major source of protein from the diets of billions.
“The most important thing isn’t necessarily that we’re losing . . . 1 million species — although that’s important, don’t misunderstand me,” Robert Watson, chairman of the U.N. panel that authored the report, told the Washington Post. “The bigger issue is the way it will affect human well-being, as we’ve said many times — food, water, energy, human health.”
Earth’s ecosystems did not evolve to thrive amid the conditions that a global, advanced capitalist civilization of 7 billion humans has created. And that civilization did not evolve to thrive on a planet without coral reefs, wetlands, or wild bees — and with global temperatures exceeding preindustrial levels by 1.5 degrees. Bringing our civilization’s ambitions and modes of operation into better alignment with the environment’s demands no act of altruism. It merely requires recognizing our own collective long-term self-interest, and “changing the way we grow food, produce energy, deal with climate change and dispose of waste,” on a global level, through international cooperation.
In other words: Humanity is probably going out in a globe-spanning murder-suicide. But it doesn’t have to — if we can recognize the interdependence of all human beings well enough to build an international government that recognizes the interdependence of all living things.
Eric Levitz



8:00 P.M.
Partisanship May Limit How Much Trump Can Benefit From a Good Economy in 2020

It’s not an exaggeration to say that at the elite and activist level Republicans hope — and Democrats fear — the recently robust economic trends will produce a second term for Donald Trump. Some observers just intone, “It’s the economy, stupid,” like a mantra; more sophisticated analysts deploy formulas in which major macroeconomic indicators like GDP growth and unemployment rates are combined with the president’s job-approval ratings and perhaps other data in predicting the 2020 presidential general election, absent any information about Trump’s Democratic opponent.
But such analysis depends on the assumption (generally valid in years past) that perceptions of the economy are mostly rational and don’t differ tremendously between people of different political persuasions. As the Cook Political Report’s Amy Walter notes this week, that’s one of many assumptions that seem no longer sustainable in the Trump era:
Specifically, Republicans were 31 percent more optimistic than average about the future of the economy and Democrats were 24.3 percent more pessimistic. Self-identified independents came right down in the middle, but  I’m betting they, too, are split between Democratic and Republican leaners.
So people drawing from the same data (albeit in many cases through the lens of different media) and presumably a lot of the same real-life experiences nonetheless go in very different directions in what they expect to happen down the road. And that will almost certainly reinforce as well as reflect partisan differences.
These findings also provide a new perspective from which to answer the age-old but especially pertinent question about the extent to which voters are moved by economic concerns as opposed to cultural or partisan identity. Economic concerns currently appear to be shaped by identity, notes Walter:
Now it’s possible that this partisan divergence in perceptions could change if economic conditions continue to improve, particularly during the early election-year window in which such perceptions matter most in informing voting preferences. But if voters continue to diverge along partisan lines in how the expect the economy to evolve, they will likely continue to diverge in voting behavior as well. Again, this is a departure from past years in which people largely agreed on the direction of the economy, with the non-presidential-party finding other issues — even other economic issues, like the distribution of wealth and poverty in a thriving economy, or the affordability of medical care — to emphasize in trying to seize control of the White House.
To put it another way, the anger and mistrust that Trump has sown among members of the opposition party (and independents who lean in that direction) will sharply limit his ability to persuade these same people that the economy is in good shape and he deserves the credit. And even if things look good, the future will look dim to those who fear what Trump will do in a second term.
Now this also means that if the economy slows down or heads south, Trump will not bear the full brunt of disappointment; his partisans will still see prosperity around every corner. But barring something exceptional in a positive or negative economic direction, Trump’s going to have to campaign on his full record, his full agenda, and the full set of impressions he has made during his first term — while blasting away at his opponent as standing for a future ruined by socialism, secularism, and political correctness.
No matter how the economy performs, Trump is never going to be the sort of president who is primarily perceived by friends or foes as the safe steward of an improving status quo. So no, economic statistics alone won’t extend this presidency beyond 2021. If they could, his job-approval ratings would not be stuck in the 40s. At a minimum, he’ll need a dollop of cultural and racial resentment and a boatload of good luck in the opponent Democrats choose for him — and in again threading the needle in the Electoral College.
Ed Kilgore



6:38 P.M.
Russia Claims Trump Reached Out to Putin for Lengthy Friday Call

On Friday, President Trump told reporters about his phone call earlier in the day with Vladimir Putin, claiming that the two discussed the Mueller report, which he referred to as the “Russian hoax.” Noticeably absent from the exchange was any warning from the American president to his Russian counterpart regarding interference in the 2020 election. Trump, who apparently can determine facial expressions through phone calls, said that Putin “sort of smiled when he said something to the effect that [the Mueller investigation] started off as a mountain and it ended up being a mouse.”
On Sunday, the Russian Embassy stated on Facebook that the hour and a half conversation between the two leaders was initiated by President Trump, who called to discuss “a shared commitment to step up dialogue in various areas, including on issues of strategic ability.” That diplomatic pablum breaks down to a conversation in which foreign-policy expert Donald Trump took the advice of traditional American ally Vladimir Putin on the crises of North Korea and Venezuela.
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said that Trump and Putin discussed North Korea for “a good bit of time” and “reiterated both the commitment and need for denuclearization.” Sanders said Trump told Putin about the “importance of Russia stepping up” on the Korean Peninsula. CNN reports that the Kremlin said Putin called for Trump to reduce sanctions against the Kim government.
The leadership crisis in Venezuela was the “primary focus” of the call, according to Sanders. On Friday, Trump told reporters in the Oval Office that Putin claimed Russia “is not looking at all to get involved in Venezuela other than he’d like to see something positive happen for Venezuela.” It appears that Trump is taking Putin at his word regarding Russian foreign policy — despite Secretary of State Mike Pompeo asserting on Wednesday that the Kremlin had talked Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro out of his alleged plan to leave the country for Cuba. Trump’s national-security advisers also reportedly have told the president that Russia is offering critical support to the Maduro government.
Trump has frequently sought the advice of authoritarian leaders on foreign affairs: Glaring examples include his 2018 phone call with Turkish president Recep Erdoğan that reportedly led to Trump’s impromptu decision to withdraw American forces from Syria, and each time he has agreed with Putin regarding Russian interference in the 2016 election. Assuming the Russian Embassy’s information is true, it now appears that the president is actively seeking out the advice of Putin, preferring the word of the autocrat to that of his own intelligence community and their briefs that he doesn’t read.
Matt Stieb



5:23 P.M.
Trump Scared to Let Robert Mueller Testify, Despite ‘Exoneration’

President Trump has been insisting that the Mueller report amounts to TOTAL EXONERATION, having proved NO COLLUSION and NO OBSTRUCTION. As of Friday, he registered no objection to the author of that exonerating report, Robert Mueller, testifying to Congress.
Now Trump is demanding that Mueller not testify.
One answer to his question of why Congress would want Mueller to testify despite his “strong NO COLLUSION conclusion” is that he did not actually reach such a conclusion.
It is comically obvious that Trump relied on William Barr’s summary to shape a media narrative about the Mueller report that is not reflected in its actual substance. Trump fears a “redo,” i.e., Mueller having the chance to summarize his own work, rather than having his loyal attorney general do it for him.
Jonathan Chait



4:30 P.M.
Biden Stumbles Into Trump’s Nickname War

Joe Biden called President Trump a “clown” at a private fundraiser in South Carolina on Saturday night when asked by a supporter if he would respond to Trump’s insults. Politico reports that Biden had made it clear he didn’t want to get into that kind of thing with Trump, but did anyway, and as anyone could have expected, his comment ended up as a headline.
“There’s so many nicknames I’m inclined to give this guy,” Biden reportedly said, drawing laughter from the small crowd of donors.
“You can just start with clown,” Biden said, though he also reportedly referred to the president as a “no-good S.O.B.” at the event.
Trump’s political rhetoric (and need to feel dominant over others) has always leaned on the use of derisive nicknames, both on the campaign trail and in the White House. Trump’s name-calling is prolific enough to have its own Wikipedia page, but the names themselves often seem lazily conceived, focusing on people’s physical appearance or demeanor, or just reusing the same prepositive adjectives for different people, like “crazy,” “wacky,” or “lyin’.” In the case of Biden, Trump has previously used “1 Percent Biden” — a reference to how Biden did at the polls in the the 2008 Democratic primaries, and “Crazy Joe Biden” — after the former vice-president said last year, in response to Trump’s boasts about sexual assault, “If we were in high school, I’d take him behind the gym and beat the hell out of him.”
But Trump seems to have landed on “Sleepy Joe” (or the variation “sleepy man”) as his opening nickname for Biden, but it’s just a retread of earlier attacks on senators Joe Donnelly and Bob Casey, as well as NBC News’ Chuck Todd. It also hasn’t been obvious why Trump thinks Biden is best described and dismissed as sleep-deprived, an argument that would normally be an important part of rolling out an attack meant to frame a political opponent in the minds of voters. The most complete explanation Trump has yet given for the choice was to Sean Hannity on Fox News two weeks ago:
Trump is presumably referring to using “creepy” as an alternative, on account of Biden’s reputation for inappropriate contact with women, but the president seems to have temporarily opted against highlighting that issue, as doing so might re-highlight his own horrendous conduct toward women.
Then again, Trump’s insults aren’t always strategic, or even very memorable. But while the president would probably lose a taunting match with any moderately clever 5-year-old, he has still normalized these types of attacks like no American politician before him, and they have worked in his favor more often than they seem to have hurt him politically. In 2016, Trump’s nickname framing of “Little Marco” Rubio, “Low Energy Jeb” Bush, and “Crooked Hillary” Clinton undoubtedly helped his campaign and was one of the ways he got news networks to pay attention to him, and one of the ways Trump convinced voters that he was the as-seen-on-TV, blunt-talking novelty they could believe in.
No attempts to go taunt-for-taunt with Trump have been effective, and the news cycles created by his comments and the subsequent response just amplifies whatever Trump said and drowns out everything else. Biden seemed to be aware of this, telling supporters on Saturday that he wanted to steer clear of distractions like trading insults, since that scenario benefits Trump. “On every single issue and on every demeaning thing he says about other people, I have no problem responding directly,” Biden said at the fundraiser. “What I’m not going to do is get into what he wants me to do. He wants this to be a mud-wrestling match.”
The former vice-president also reportedly explained that he regretted his comment from last year about beating up Trump in high school. “I probably shouldn’t have done that,” Biden said. “I don’t want to get it down to that level — the presidency is an office that requires some dignity.” Biden added that he knew Trump would personally attack him and his family over the course of the campaign, and, yeah, he likely will.
Some Democratic primary voters may reward personal attacks on Trump, and news coverage will definitely reward any and all mud wrestling. But when it comes to avoiding the trap of Trump’s cacophony, those who say they want to avoid and starve the beast while feeding the beast are doing a pretty good impression of a clown themselves.
Chas Danner



May 3, 2019
Federal Court Strikes Down Ohio’s Gerrymandered House Map

In 2016, the Democratic Party had a poor showing in Ohio. Donald Trump bested Hillary Clinton by eight points statewide, and Republicans claimed 12 of the state’s 16 House seats.
In 2012, by contrast, the Democrats had a very good night in Ohio, as Barack Obama defeated Mitt Romney by four points, and … Republicans claimed 12 of the state’s 16 House seats.
To many Democratic voters in the Buckeye State, the GOP’s apparent hammerlock on three-quarters of Ohio’s House delegation reflects a partisan gerrymander so severe it violates their constitutional rights. And on Friday, a federal district court in Cincinnati agreed. In its ruling, the three-judge panel barred Ohio from a holding another election on its existing map and ordered the state’s legislature to devise new district lines by June 14 — or else submit to a court-drawn map.
In reality, though, the GOP-controlled Ohio legislature probably has a third option: Wait for the (effectively) GOP-controlled Supreme Court to strike down today’s ruling. The high court’s conservative majority has repeatedly declined to declare partisan gerrymandering unconstitutional. And although the Supreme Court agreed to hear a challenge to partisan gerrymanders in North Carolina and Maryland earlier this year, experts who observed oral arguments were left with the impression that those states’ biased maps would be upheld.
Either way, Ohio will be redrawing its maps after 2020 to comply with both the new Census and a “fair districting” constitutional amendment the state passed in 2018, which ostensibly mandates a bipartisan redistricting process. But, as Stephen Wolf of the Daily Kos explains, that reform, by itself, won’t necessarily prohibit Republicans from rigging the House map in their favor for another decade:
All this said, even if the Supreme Court strikes down today’s ruling — and Ohio Republicans try to subvert the redistricting reform that passed last year — there is still one way that fair districting could prevail in the Buckeye State: If Democrats can flip two seats on Ohio’s Supreme Court in 2020, a liberal majority could find partisan gerrymandering illegitimate under the state Constitution.
Eric Levitz



May 3, 2019
Bill de Blasio Is Reportedly Running for President, for Some Unfathomable Reason

He has aroused little or no interest in the early 2020 caucus and primary states he’s visited. His own constituents think it’s a terrible idea. A host of political experts and advisers, including his mayoral campaign consultant Rebecca Katz, have told him it’s a bad idea. According to one report, even his wife is less than enthusiastic.
Nonetheless, the Daily News reports that New York mayor Bill de Blasio is going to announce a presidential candidacy next week:
All he wants for his birthday, it seems, is a schedule of trips to Iowa and New Hampshire.
The Daily News stink bomb of a report is not uncontested:
But given how stubbornly he’s resisted months of negative signals about this bad idea, reports that it’s full speed ahead are entirely credible. It does sound like aggrieved New Yorkers and Democrats everywhere who are tired of the endless expansion of the 2020 field will have a few days to wail and gnash their teeth and rend their clothes in hopes of convincing Hizzoner not to run.
If he crashes ahead like a bull elk in rut, de Blasio will be the 22nd candidate to run (Montana governor Steve Bullock is reportedly going to announce in a couple of weeks, making it 23). If there’s a “lane” for this left-of-center white man with underwater job-approval numbers, it may be the doomed collection of candidates running for reasons other than any remote chance of victory. About the only suspense his candidacy might generate is whether his famous constituent, the president of the United States, bothers to give him a nickname.
Ed Kilgore



May 3, 2019
The Health-Care Crisis Has Spread to Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance

For most of this century, the big U.S. health-care policy issue has been providing insurance to the uninsured, including the uninsurable people with expensive health conditions. Yes, the majority of non-elderly Americans covered by employer-based insurance were affected by this debate insofar as sharing the costs of more universal coverage would increase their premiums and/or taxes. But for the most part, Americans were relatively happy with the insurance they got at work.
That’s changing, as is graphically illustrated by a major new survey conducted by the Los Angeles Times and the Kaiser Family Foundation that shows insurance deductibles, co-pays, and other “cost sharing” requirements by insurers are putting the squeeze on affected policyholders in a big way.
As the Times’ Noam Levy explains, the rise of deductibles has been dramatic:
And that’s not even counting those who skip care they need because they cannot afford to pay their “share” of steadily rising medical bills.
When people don’t get essential care, of course, insurance has failed everyone other than the insurer itself. And while everyone was aware cost-sharing requirements were steadily increasing, it did sneak up on policy-makers whose attention was elsewhere:
But this was by no means accidental. High-deductible insurance plans were promoted both by the industry and by conservative politicians:
If that sounds familiar to consumers of political rhetoric, it’s because Republicans have long promoted patient-driven competition as a health-care cost panacea, usually through a combination of high-deductible insurance plans and tax-preferred health savings accounts designed to help consumers save for out-of-pocket costs:
Guess who got left holding the bag? That’s right, the employees, who were essentially victims of a bait and switch.
Now, suddenly, people with employer-sponsored health insurance have more to worry about than fighting managed care and/or maintaining the right to choose doctors:
This shift in sentiment also helps explain why Medicare for All is so popular an idea. Yes, seamless universal coverage is attractive, but getting rid of deductible, co-pays, and even (in the more generous proposals) premiums could be an even bigger deal. It’s enough to make proponents of “skin in the game” nervous:
Exactly.
Ed Kilgore



May 3, 2019
California Threatens to Ban Trump From 2020 Primary Ballot Unless He Releases Tax Returns

In a revival of legislation that former governor Jerry Brown vetoed in 2017, the California Senate has passed a bill that would deny access to the state’s 2020 presidential primary to any candidate who hasn’t disclosed five years of personal income tax returns. The House has passed it before, and will probably do so again, more or less along party lines. Governor Gavin Newsom hasn’t indicated whether he would sign it or veto it.
The Sacramento Bee described the legislation and its prior disposition in March:
A similar bill was passed by one legislative chamber in Maryland and in Rhode Island, and parallel legislation has been introduced at one time or another in 22 other states, including Trump’s home state of New York (where Governor Andrew Cuomo is backing it).
Constitutional authorities are split on whether this sort of condition for ballot access would be permissible under judicial review. There’s no direct Supreme Court precedent. But election law expert Rick Hasen, who discussed the issue extensively at Politico last year, found an inferred precedent for this practice in — of all places — Bush v. Gore:
But others disagree, as the Associated Press reported in 2017:
If Newsom or some other governor signs such legislation, the case will likely wind its way to the Supreme Court, perhaps before ballots have to be printed for 2020.
If these laws are upheld, the practical effect on Trump might be minimal, so long as the only primary opposition he faces is from nonviable candidates like former Massachusetts governor William Weld. Trump would probably overwhelm Weld with write-in votes alone in most if not all states. And there are only 14 states with Democratic legislatures and governors where passage of punitive legislation affecting ballot access has a serious chance of passage. In a state as important to the Democratic presidential nominating process as California, though, such legislation, even if it’s under judicial review, would most likely raise the number of Democrats (nine so far) who have released their own tax returns.
For Trump, then, such legislation is mostly an embarrassment that keeps the issue of his nondisclosure of tax returns and other financial data in the news. Knowing him, if California becomes the first state to pass such legislation, it will simply add to the volume of Trump’s perpetual rhetorical war on the Golden State, which he’s already accused of election fraud, coddling rapists and murderers, gross mismanagement of forests, and titanic waste of federal tax dollars. Things could get even dicier for California Republicans, who are already in constant conflict with their neighbors on behalf of the distant presidential warlord. But having to defend his secrecy about his tax returns is probably the least of their burdens.
Ed Kilgore



May 3, 2019
With PRO Act, Democrats Commit to Dramatic Labor Reforms

Forty Senate Democrats joined 100 of their House colleagues on Thursday to introduce a sweeping new piece of pro-union legislation. The Protecting the Right to Organize Act, or PRO Act, would shore up workers’ rights to strike, to organize, and to pursue litigation against employers that violate their rights. More specifically, it would ban employers from forcing hires to sign away their right to pursue collective or class-action litigation and from permanently replacing workers who go on strike. It would also require employers to begin bargaining a contract no later than ten days after a union has been certified.
The PRO Act has seemingly united ideological factions of the Democratic Party; its list of co-sponsors includes centrists like Democratic leader Chuck Schumer and progressive stalwarts like Representative Pramila Jayapal. Though the bill has no hope of passing a Republican-controlled Senate, it, like H.R. 1, is useful as an exercise in party-identity formation — a clear sign that Democrats want to shore up their pro-worker bona fides. The bill may also be useful to aspiring Democratic presidents. Josh Eidelson of Bloomberg reported on Twitter that the PRO Act’s Senate co-sponsors include presidential hopefuls Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, Kamala Harris, Cory Booker, and Kirsten Gillibrand. As the field of Democratic candidates continues to expand, Sanders, Warren, Harris, Booker, and Gillibrand have all attempted to position themselves on the party’s left flank, though some of their efforts have been more detailed — and more progressive — than others. Labor’s support will be vital not only to a successful primary race but also to victory in the general election. By co-sponsoring the PRO Act, these candidates have committed themselves publicly to a dramatic reform of the National Labor Relations Act.
The PRO Act did not form itself in a void. Many of its provisions appear to be based on the Workplace Democracy Act, which was introduced last year. As Eidelson reported at the time, the WDA would have repealed state right-to-work laws. The PRO Act, similarly, would ban the practice of free riding, where workers eligible for union membership benefit from a collective bargaining agreement without paying fair-share fees to cover the costs of the union’s work. The PRO Act would also strengthen the right to strike by protecting intermittent strikes, when workers carry out a series of short-term walkouts to increase pressure on an employer, and by ending prohibitions on secondary strikes, known as solidarity strikes. For examples, when Stop & Shop workers went on strike last month, they launched a primary strike under the auspices of their union, the United Food and Commercial Workers. Then truck drivers represented by the Teamsters refused to cross picket lines to deliver goods to Stop & Shop locations. Teamster contracts often include the right to conduct solidarity strikes, but if the PRO Act ever becomes law, it would expand that right to the labor movement writ large.
The bill asserts that prohibitions on solidarity strikes violate workers’ rights to free expression. “Workers must be free to act in solidarity with workers in other workplaces in order to improve labor standards and achieve other lawful ends for mutual aid or protection,” it reads. Formally protecting the right to conduct a solidarity strike would greatly enhance labor’s leverage over recalcitrant employers, a move in keeping with other provisions in the act that would curtail employer power at work. The bill would ban employers from forcing workers to attend anti-union meetings, and from “misclassifying” employees as independent contractors in a bid to skirt labor protections.
The Teamsters have already endorsed the legislation, saying in a statement that it would “restore fairness to the economy at a time when income inequality has stifled the ability of far too many hardworking Americans to earn a decent wage that allows them to support their families.” The Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning think tank, also praised the bill. “The PRO Act is an important effort to bring U.S. labor law into the 21st century — giving working people more power at a time when it is desperately needed,” Celine McNicholas, EPI’s director of government affairs, announced in a public statement.
A well-funded, well-organized network of right-to-work groups will likely challenge the PRO Act if it ever becomes law, and the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in Janus v. AFSCME doesn’t encourage confidence in the outcome of any potential litigation. Challenges notwithstanding, the PRO Act would significantly improve the state of workers’ rights in the United States, and the labor movement will expect Democrats — and eventually, the party’s presidential nominee — to keep the promises they’ve made.
Sarah Jones



May 3, 2019
Trump Says His Faith Got Him Through Mueller Investigation

One might imagine that our staunchly evangelical vice-president would be the most qualified White House official to give remarks at the National Day of Prayer held in the Rose Garden on Thursday. But after Mike Pence gave his statements — including the Muslim Ban-ignoring claim that his boss “has taken steps to ensure that the federal government will never, ever penalize anyone for their religious beliefs ever again” — President Trump took to the podium to share his experience with his own faith.
Unsurprisingly, it became a moment of self defense. “People say, ‘How do you get through that whole stuff? How do you go through those witch hunts and everything else?’” Trump said. “We just do it, right? And we think about God.”
Another highlight from Trump’s speech that ignores his own attempts to limit travel to the United States from predominantly Muslim countries: He claimed that there was limited religious freedom in the U.S. prior to his inauguration. “People were not allowed or in some cases, foolishly ashamed to be using on stores ‘Merry Christmas, Happy Christmas,’” Trump said. “They’d say ‘Happy Holidays.’ They’d have red walls, and you’d never see ‘Christmas.’ That was four years ago.”
It’s an interesting angle, considering that Trump hates Christmas parties. “It makes perfect sense,” a source close to the White House told New York’s Olivia Nuzzi in December 2018. “Because it’s not about him. If it were about him, he’d love it. Christmas is not about him.”
Matt Stieb



May 2, 2019
Trump’s Nominee for U.N. Ambassador Kelly Craft Has Billion-Dollar Ties to Coal

The president, not known for his interest in multilateral alliances, has taken his time nominating an ambassador to the United Nations since Nikki Haley left the position at the end of 2018. His prior, unofficial nominee, former Fox News host Heather Nauert, faced criticism for her lack of foreign-policy experience, diplomatic exposure, and understanding of U.S. alliances: Nauert caught serious flack for citing D-Day as an example of America’s “strong relationship” with Germany. Nauert withdrew from consideration in February after reports emerged that she once employed a nanny who was not authorized to work in the United States.
On Wednesday, Trump announced that Kelly Craft would be his first official nominee for the U.N. ambassadorship since Haley’s departure. Craft certainly has more experience than the previous candidate: She’s currently serving as U.S. ambassador to Canada, was part of the U.S. delegation to the U.N. during the Bush administration, and played a role in the redraft of NAFTA now known as the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement.
Still, Democrats in the Senate will contest her nomination, and not without reason. Craft is married to Joseph W. Craft III, a billionaire coal executive who has made several efforts to cancel the Obama administration’s push to regulate his industry’s emissions, including a proposal to repeal the Clean Power Plan and the postponement of a rule that would end the practice of coal plants dumping toxic metals into rivers. His relationship with former EPA director Scott Pruitt — meeting seven times during Pruitt’s first 14 months at the agency — has been described as “cozy,” and is exemplary of the ethical sump that caused Pruitt to resign in July 2018.
If Craft’s nomination were successful, she would have an influence on significant international actions that would be harmful to her husband’s business. It’s a conflict of interest to challenge former coal lobbyist Andrew Wheeler’s title as current EPA head and the status of Rick Scott — whose company once paid a $1.7 billion penalty for defrauding Medicare — as the architect of the newest round of Trump’s nonexistent health-care reform.
Of course, one’s better half doesn’t necessarily share the same priorities in politics and environmental deregulation. But in a 2017 appearance on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Craft answered a question on global warming with the textbook (and erroneous) response of climate denialists: “I think that both sides have their own results, from their studies, and I appreciate and I respect both sides of the science.” Craft’s predecessor Haley, for her part, answered a similar question by saying that climate change “is real.”
Either Craft’s conflict of interest or her 2017 statement on climate change would be enough for Democrats to contest her nomination. Together, they suggest that the Trump administration is doubling down on its rejection of the international, if symbolic, consensus on climate change. The United Nations is one of the most vital organizations available to stave off climate disaster. It hosts the annual COP conference that, in 2015, led to the historic Paris agreement, and it publishes the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a conservative and widely cited roundup of relevant academic study. With its dire scientific survey and notorious 12-year window to limit warming to 1.5 degrees, the 2018 edition of the IPCC report is an important tool to shock from their complacency those who think we can invent our way out of the problem rather than seek political solutions.
Already, the American presence in the U.N.’s climate actions is listless. With Craft as the U.N. envoy, our role in the intergovernmental body could become actively harmful.
Matt Stieb



May 2, 2019
Why I — a Bland White Guy You’ve Never Heard Of — Am Running for President

My name is Michael Bennet, and today I announced my campaign for the presidency of the United States.
Seeking the world’s most powerful office is always an audacious act. And doing so in the present context — when the Democratic Party already has a crowded primary field full of great candidates — may seem especially brazen. So let me assure you, I did not take this decision lightly.
The Democrats who’ve already declared are all fine public servants. In ordinary times, I’d be content to support just about any of them. But these are not ordinary times. Today, the American people don’t just need good presidential candidates. They need ones who are willing to level with them, no matter the political costs. I could sit here and say that I’m running for president because America is the greatest nation on earth; or because another four years of Donald Trump would fundamentally change our nation’s character; or because the American Dream is at death’s door. But over the past three years, I’d say voters have had their fill of “alternative facts.” And I am the only candidate in this race who’s willing to ditch the poll-tested bromides, tear up the focus-group memos, and tell the people of this great nation the unvarnished truth: I am running for president because I would like to get on TV and sell some goddamn books.
America stands at a crossroads. In one direction lies division, decline, and ecological devastation; in the other, inclusion, global leadership, and sustainable prosperity. But this campaign is about something much smaller than that. It’s about whether I, as an individual, can get my memoir onto Amazon’s top-ten Bestsellers in Politics & Government. It’s about whether we’re going to live in a country where I am invited onto the network’s Sunday shows once every two months — or once every two weeks. Above all, it’s about whether I can look my children in the eye and say, “Darlings, you’re going to have to ask your mother about that, because Daddy has found an excuse to be gone for most of the next six months.”
Our republic has reached a critical juncture. An authoritarian China is gaining economic power and geopolitical influence at breakneck speed. The stagnation of middle-class wages threatens our children’s economic future, while climate change threatens their grandchildren’s very survival. But when I look into the decades to come, I do not do so with the slightest trepidation. Because I know that our republic has faced challenges just as vexing in the past, and, time after time, by hook or by crook, people as wealthy and white as I am have made it through just fine. If you want crocodile tears about Mother Gaia, go listen to Beto O’Rourke. If you want the truth, then read my lips — I’ve got half of my retirement savings invested in water, and another quarter in Albertan farmland. When the Ogallala Aquifer dries up, I’m going to be a fucking zillionaire. By the time the rising tides hit the fan, I’ll either be dead or strapped into an Oculus Rift on a luxury satellite like the one in Pixar’s Wall-E. And at that point, I promise you, I will care no more about what happens to you peasants than you all care about what’s happening to the bees.
Our country sits at the drive-through of destiny, staring down a wide range of menu options. The questions before us are pregnant with consequence. Will we choose to revive our democratic ideals, or acquiesce to creeping oligarchy? Recognize the necessity of solidarity, or retreat to a grubby individualism? More important, from my perspective, is whether The Pursuit of Truthfulness or Rocky Mountain Guy a better book title. Which will give me the best possible chance of outselling Hickenlooper by a margin wide enough to make him grimace, momentarily, the next time our eyes meet at a fund-raiser in Cherry Creek? And what can I say on the debate stage this June that will go so viral that when someone types Michael Bennett into Google, they will not be taken to news and information about a New England Patriots defensive end but will rather be asked, Did you mean “Michael Bennet”?
These are the questions that my campaign will seek to answer in the weeks and months ahead. But while this stunt candidacy is about me — not “us” — I cannot sustain it alone. If I’m going to palliate my nagging sense of insignificance by proving myself to be a less forgettable middle-aged white man than John Hickenlooper, I’m going to need your disposable income. So please, join me in this fight. Together, I believe, we can funnel significant amounts of money into the advertising firm that my friend Carl operates and thus secure favors from him at some future date.
(This is a work of satire. The real Michael Bennet is surely a lovely individual with the best of intentions.)
Eric Levitz



May 2, 2019
2020 Democrats Are Beginning to Worry About a Contested Convention

Running for president is a complicated thing with a vast array of associated tasks. Even though campaigns stay mostly focused on the immediate, there have to be strategies in place for remote (in time and likelihood) contingencies. With 21 Democratic candidates already in the field and at least one more (Steve Bullock) on the way, they must all deal with the possibility of Democrats arriving in Milwaukee in July of next year with nobody having the requisite majority of pledged delegates buttoned down.
Under this “contested convention” scenario, a strange and ironic thing would happen once a by-the-book first ballot ended in deadlock. Party superdelegates, the ex officio delegates (mostly elected officials and DNC members) who lost their independent first-ballot voting power in a post-2016 concession to angry Bernie Sanders supporters, would regain it on any second or subsequent ballot. So after being written off as nonentities, these largely Establishment figures — 769 of them in all, compared to 3,768 pledged delegates — could, in the context of a contested convention, wind up deciding it all.
As Ruby Cramer of BuzzFeed reports, the Democratic campaigns are beginning to think about this scenario. Unsurprisingly, Bernie Sanders, who has (a) prior experience running for president, (b) money to burn, and (c) a robust record of trashing the very institution of superdelegates, seems to be thinking about it most deeply:
Of course he is.
Cramer touts Kamala Harris’s campaign as having a very effective superdelegate outreach program already, under the direction of Hillary Clinton’s top 2016 delegate tracker (who also worked for DNC chairman Tom Perez). But it’s kinda something any candidate with the resources for it would want to do even if a contested convention was impossible:
That will matter a whole lot more if Democrats look up after the blitz of March primaries and see no one really in charge of the race:
In the case of a Wild West scenario, superdelegates could again walk tall in the councils of the Donkey Party, and even the fieriest of insurgents will find kind words to say about those staid Establishment figures toiling in the party’s vineyards.
Ed Kilgore



May 2, 2019
Baltimore Mayor Catherine Pugh Resigns After Children’s Book Scandal

Baltimore mayor Catherine E. Pugh resigned on Thursday, her attorney said at a press conference, which she did not attend. The city’s 50th mayor had been mired in scandal since March, when the Baltimore Sun revealed that, in 2011, she had sold her “Healthy Holly” children’s books to the University of Maryland Medical System for $500,000, and did not disclose the no-bid payment while she was a state senator. At the time, she also sat on the UMMS board of directors and did not recuse herself from votes involving the hospital system. Pugh’s resignation is effective immediately.
On March 20, Pugh told the Sun that she had not distributed her books besides the 100,000 sold to UMMS over a period of several years. But it soon emerged that other health-care interests had paid for the books, including insurance company Kaiser Permanente, which purchased “Healthy Holly” titles while it sought a $48 million contract with Baltimore. (Books in the series, which include Exercising Is Fun! and Fruits Come in Colors Like the Rainbow, reportedly contain  a number of copy errors despite their high price tag.)
On April 1, Pugh announced that she was taking a leave of absence, citing a hospitalization for pneumonia. She had pledged to return to her position, until the FBI and IRS raided her home and City Hall office on April 25, revealing that both federal and state officials were investigating her actions.
Pugh, 69, has been mayor since 2016, and served on the Baltimore City Council since 1999. Council President Bernard C. “Jack” Young has been at the helm of city government since Pugh announced her leave of absence, and will succeed her as mayor.
“I’m sorry for the harm that I have caused to the image of the city of Baltimore and the credibility of the office of the mayor,” Pugh wrote in her resignation letter. “Baltimore deserves a mayor who can move our great city forward.” But as the Sun suggests, that might not be a given. Pugh is the second Baltimore mayor in a decade to resign while involved in a criminal investigation. Sheila Dixon, the mayor from 2007 to 2010, resigned after being indicted on 12 felony and misdemeanor counts related to her alleged misappropriation of gift cards intended for the city’s poor.
Matt Stieb



May 2, 2019
Unqualified Misogynist Kook Stephen Moore Gives Up Federal Reserve Bid

This morning, Stephen Moore told reporters his nomination for the Federal Reserve Board would not be pulled. “I’m all in,” he told Bloomberg News. “My biggest ally is the president. He’s full speed ahead.” Like most Moore predictions, this quickly proved to be completely wrong. By lunchtime, Moore was out.
Moore’s nomination came about when Trump-administration economist Lawrence Kudlow recommended Moore, his co-author, close friend, and partner in extreme voodoo-economics wrongness. Trump impulsively announced the pick.
Moore’s total lack of relevant expertise — he has admitted, “I’m not an expert in monetary policy,” which is like applying for a job at an auto plant by boasting you’re bad at assembling cars — did not doom his nomination. Nor did his record of dogmatic and comically misguided economic claims. Rather, his nomination was deep-sixed by a combination of misogynistic writings and behaviors.
Moore was accused of flagrantly cheating on his wife, whom he mocked publicly as a “loss leader” who “doesn’t have a job” and reportedly stiffed on child support. He also fantasized in his writings about picking up a younger and more attractive partner. His columns included rants against women’s sports and proposed that women not be allowed to officiate or even sell beer at basketball games. Moore explained he was joking, which is true in a sense, but the joke is clearly a hyperbolic version of his actual beliefs.
Moore’s statement to President Trump announcing his withdrawal begins, “I am honored and grateful you asked me to serve on the Federal Reserve Board,” which makes it the first such notice in memory to quote Luca Brasi. Moore piously added that he could not bear the pain an extended nomination fight would create for his family. “The unrelenting attacks on my character,” he writes, “have become untenable for me and my family, and three more months of this would be too hard on us.”
His poor family — they’ve already been through so much, what with his  adultery and denial of child support!
The lesson for Trump is that he probably can stack the Federal Reserve Board with partisan loyalists and party hacks — provided he has the patience to vet them first.
Jonathan Chait



May 2, 2019
Democrats, Don’t Forget How ‘Unelectable’ Trump Looked 4 Years Ago

As the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination contest gets underway, there is understandably an almost neurotic preoccupation among party activists and voters alike about choosing someone “electable” to deny Donald Trump the terrifying prospect of a second term in the White House. The fear of again “blowing it” against Trump, as Hillary Clinton is perceived to have done in 2016 (with a lot of help from James Comey, the media, and complacent voters), will probably intensify as voting begins next year, assuming the general election looks as competitive as it does right now.
There is not, unfortunately, one crystal-clear way to determine “electability.” As I observed recently, multiple 2020 candidates have “electability” arguments based on different assumptions of what will work against Trump specifically or Republicans generally. But without question, general-election trial-heat polls matching this or that Democrat against the incumbent will get more attention than they probably deserve. Joe Biden’s generally strong performance in such polls is undoubtedly boosting his 2020 campaign.
One of the ironies of trying to assess the viability of candidates against Trump is that Trump himself flunked every imaginable test of “electability” throughout much of the 2016 presidential cycle. I took a look at two polls taken at roughly this time in 2015, and they sure didn’t make the mogul look like someone likely to take down Clinton. A May 2015 Quinnipiac survey showed HRC leading Mike Huckabee by seven points; Scott Walker by eight points; Chris Christie by nine points; Jeb Bush by 10 points, Ted Cruz by 11 points — and Donald Trump by 18 points. A CNN survey taken the next month, shortly after Trump’s official announcement of candidacy, had Clinton leading him by 24 points; again, he ran more poorly than the rest of the field by a considerable margin. In July 2015, a McLatchy–Marist poll found an assortment of Republican candidates within single digits of HRC, and Trump down by 16 points. And Trump’s uniquely and universally poor standing had nothing to do with the name identification problem some of his rivals faced: A July 2015 Gallup survey found him to be the best-known Republican in the field.
So anyone paying attention to objective measurements of “electability” at this point in the 2016 contest would have written off Trump entirely. And he certainly did not do any better in subjective assessments of the kind of Republican candidate likely to win. He had zero governing experience, a vast boneyard of business and personal skeletons in his closet, and the least “statesmanlike” demeanor possible. And as Kyle Kondik noted in a piece on how slippery electability can be, he was “wrong” on the issues, too:
So at this point in the 2020 contest, which Democratic prospect is less “electable” than Trump was at the same point in 2015? Any of them?
As Kondik points out, there’s a rich history of successful presidential candidates who were once deemed unelectable:
Does this mean that Democrats should just throw up their hands and forget about “electability” altogether? No, not unless they’re perfectly happy with the possibility of maximizing the odds of a 2021 hellscape in which Trump will be able to enjoy four more years in office with even less accountability than he has right now. But they should check their premises regularly in terms of how they define their candidates’ general-election strength, and look at polls not less often but more carefully.
Ed Kilgore



May 2, 2019
Barr Has Protected Trump. His Next Step Is to Smear His Opponents.

Over the last 24 hours, two events took place that will probably loom very large over the next 18 months. The first was an exchange between Senator Kamala Harris and Attorney General William Barr at a hearing yesterday. “Attorney General Barr, has the president or anyone at the White House ever asked or suggested that you open an investigation of anyone?” asked Harris. Barr stammered, asked Harris to repeat the quite simple question, and then began parsing. “I’m trying to grapple with the word ‘suggest,’” he told Harris. “I mean, there have been discussions of matters out there that they have not asked me to open an investigation, but …” before trailing off ominously.
The second is a strange, somewhat convoluted but highly significant report that appeared last night in the New York Times. The story simultaneously reports on efforts by Trump loyalists to gin up dirt on Joe Biden and Ukraine, while also conveying the dirt itself. Put aside the substance of the reporting for a moment; what matters is that this is a bright flashing signal of where Barr’s fearsome powers may be directed next.
Trump has always demanded an attorney general who will act as his personal sword and shield. In Trump’s highly transparent mind, the two roles are inextricably linked. He is almost incapable of proclaiming his own innocence without immediately segueing to the alleged guilt of his enemies. He must be cleared, and his rivals must be investigated.
The Mueller report’s section on Trump’s many attempts to get the Department of Justice off his back incidentally describes his repeated efforts to sic it on his rivals. The president’s frustration with Attorney General Jeff Sessions consisted in almost equal measure his recusal from the Russia probe and his failure to follow through on Trump’s promises to lock up his opponents.
Sessions did not refuse Trump’s demand altogether — he simply dissolved them into pro forma bureaucratic measures. In November 2017, he ordered up a review of the department’s handling of the Russia investigation and various accusations against Clinton. Sessions asked the U.S. Attorney in Utah, John Huber, to look into Trump’s allegations.
Apparently these activities were little more than spinning of wheels in an effort to placate Trump with the appearance of activity. But it’s hardly safe to assume that he can be put off in this fashion forever. Trump fired Sessions and replaced him with an attorney general who has given every appearance of satisfying Trump’s demands. Trump “has told those around him that, after being disappointed by former Attorney General Jeff Sessions, he has found an attorney general loyal to him,” reports the Associated Press, in one of the more chilling lines to appear in the news in some time.
One direction the loyal AG is obviously heading is yet another investigation into the origins of the Russia probe. At Barr’s hearing, Republican senators devoted most of their time to repeating wild allegations about the Russia investigation as deep state coup. The FBI has become in the right-wing mind “unelected progressive elites” nefariously seeking to reverse the 2016 election out of pure coastal elitist hatred for Trump and his voters. Barr has promised more counter-investigations of the FBI’s investigation of Trump. At both this hearing and the previous one, Barr — who has maintained a studious neutrality about Trump’s multiple demonstrated offenses — casually prejudged the outcome, telling Congress the FBI’s conduct disturbed him.
A second direction for Barr’s investigatory powers is now coming into view. As Hillary Clinton’s value as a foil has receded, Trump has taken aim at the candidate he sees as his most likely and formidable threat: Joe Biden. The new Times story describes both the connections between Biden and Ukraine, and Trumpworld’s efforts to criminalize them.
The evidence for the former is extant, but thin: Hunter Biden has legally but somewhat sleazily traded on his father’s name through various investment and consulting arrangements. One of those dealt with Ukraine, which involved his father during the Obama presidency, because Biden senior demanded the firing of a Ukrainian prosecutor who “had been accused of turning a blind eye to corruption in his own office and among the political elite.” It happens that this corrupt prosecutor had targeted a client of Hunter Biden’s. That is a conflict of interest, though Joe Biden’s only “crime” was opposing a corrupt figure who his administration would and should have opposed anyway.
The far greater evidence of misconduct lies in the other half of the story. The Trump administration is pressuring Ukraine to advance the case specifically in order to smear Biden. Rudy Giuliani, Trump’s attorney of sorts, has discussed the case with both the ousted Ukrainian prosecutor and his successor. “He met with the current prosecutor multiple times in New York this year,” reports the Times. “The current prosecutor general later told associates that, during one of the meetings, Mr. Giuliani called Mr. Trump excitedly to brief him on his findings, according to people familiar with the conversations.”
The context for this revelation is another story the Times broke last year, and oddly fails to mention in its latest report. That story revealed that Ukraine had ceased all cooperation with the Mueller probe — which of course had as one of its central subjects of inquiry Paul Manafort’s work on behalf of Russian-backed parties in Ukraine. The Ukrainian government had been helping to expose Manafort’s corrupt schemes, but abruptly halted its efforts when the Trump administration offered military help. That story clearly suggested a straight trade, in which Trump gave Ukraine missiles in return for Ukraine helping Trump block the Mueller investigation.
The new report fits right into line with this interpretation. Having first helped Trump by shutting down its probe of Manafort, now Ukraine is helping him find some mud on a likely opponent. (Again, for Trump, the offensive and defensive abuses of justice are inextricable.)
Republican media have already laid the predicate for an investigation. John Solomon, a vessel for Republican leaks, published a long story last month suggesting Ukrainian prosecutors were sitting on a trove of evidence of Democratic misconduct they were eager to share with American counterparts. A week ago, Trump excitedly told Sean Hannity that Barr was investigating “big” and “incredible” allegations from Ukraine.
It would hardly be a shock if all this came to nothing. Maybe Barr is mollifying Trump more cleverly than his predecessor, pretending to launch politically motivated investigations of Trump’s preferred targets that will spin their wheels and go nowhere.
But the events of the last month give little comfort to the presumption that the rule of law is safe from Trump’s predations. Every step Barr has taken indicates the meeting of the minds with the president is a genuine one, and that he has taken up his role as the president’s Roy Cohn out of real conviction. The Republican Party has embraced wholesale the president’s claim that he has been vindicated on his alliance with Russia and his efforts to block the probe thereof. What reason does Trump have to doubt that they will stand behind him if his loyal AG turns the federal prosecutorial apparatus against his enemies?
Jonathan Chait



May 2, 2019
Two More Long Shots, Steve Bullock and Michael Bennet, to Join Vast Presidential Field

There are currently 20 announced Democratic candidates for president deemed “serious” aspirants. (That includes one candidate, Wayne Messam, who isn’t on some lists, although he is mayor of Miramar, Florida, which is larger than Pete Buttigieg’s South Bend). Now two others with solid résumés but little to no national name ID are joining the fray.
MTN News reports Montana governor Steve Bullock will announce his long-discussed candidacy “in two weeks.”
And on CBS this morning, Colorado senator Michael Bennet became the seventh U.S. senator in the 2020 field:
That’s right, two more white dudes joining ten others already in the field. They have other things in common: moderate reputations; Rocky Mountain time zone backgrounds and addresses; and good records as politicians in their home states. It’s unclear whether any of these attributes will matter much in a crowded field of candidates who all have head starts on these Westerners.
Bullock is probably taken more seriously among national observers, though his delayed announcement (he waited until his state’s legislature adjourned, and will wait a while longer while he deals with the gubernatorial task of signing and vetoing bills) may have squandered a lot of that interest. As Gabriel Debenedetti explained in a 2017 profile of Bullock, he’s a very good retail politician in a difficult state for his party:
Like Beto O’Rourke of Texas and Stacey Abrams of Georgia, Bullock rejected overtures from Chuck Schumer to run for the Senate in 2020. He set up a PAC that deployed staff in Iowa some time ago. But he will struggle to reach the polling or fundraising thresholds necessary to get him onto the debate stage for the first meeting of candidates in June. He also needs to find signature issues to distinguish himself, other than his ability to put together a relatively progressive record (including Medicaid expansion) in a place like Montana. He does have some background in fighting for campaign-finance reform.
Bennet also has a strong electoral background, winning his first full Senate term in the very strong Republican year of 2010 and being reelected by a comfortable margin in 2016. His background is mostly in education policy (he was superintendent of schools in Denver in 2009 when then-Governor Bill Ritter appointed him to the vacant Senate seat of Ken Salazar, who had become Obama’s secretary of the Interior), and he’ll probably need to distinguish himself in other policy areas.
There are three really unusual things about Bennet’s proto-candidacy, though. First, he announced not long ago that he had prostate cancer. But he’s since had surgery, and is indicating that his doctors gave him a green light to run. Second, he’s the older brother of New York Times editorial-page editor James Bennet, who announced this morning that he would recuse himself from involvement in any coverage of the 2020 campaign so long as Michael is in the race. And third, he was once chief of staff for another candidate already in the field, John Hickenlooper, when the former governor was mayor of Denver. They will inevitably overlap in fundraising networks and political associations in ways that will complicate life for both of them.
It’s unclear what path either candidate would have to the nomination. Iowa is not that distant, geographically or culturally, from either of them, but vastly better known and more popular candidates were there first (some, like Biden and Sanders, have been there in the past). Another early state, Nevada, is in the West, but its strong Latino and labor orientations will probably cater to others more easily. Bennet’s Colorado and another Rocky Mountain state, Utah, vote on Super Tuesday (March 3), but will be dwarfed by primaries that day in giants California and Texas. Bullock’s Montana doesn’t hold its primary until June. About the most either of them can hope for is a surprisingly strong if distant finish in Iowa followed by a rapidly winnowed field in which “electability” becomes a paramount concern. And even then it would be a reach.
It would be nice to be able to say definitively today that once Bullock and Bennet formally announce, the field will finally be complete. But unfortunately, New York mayor Bill de Blasio is still toying with a race, despite the notable lack of enthusiasm he has engendered for the idea at home and elsewhere. And Georgia’s Stacey Abrams, who would have some immediate support, has indicated she thinks she could launch a viable candidacy as late as this autumn, after the first two sets of debates. So the final, final Democratic presidential field isn’t set yet. But despite the growing diversity of the Donkey Party, it is clear white men will still be amply represented in the choices available to primary voters.
Ed Kilgore



May 2, 2019
Fox’s Chris Wallace Rips Network’s ‘Opinion People’ for Not Dealing in Facts

Fox News host Chris Wallace is annoyed at his network’s “opinion people.”
Wednesday, after a day of Senate testimony from Attorney General William Barr, the newsman called out his colleagues who are letting their “political agenda” get in the way of the “facts.” He was particularly perturbed by those dismissing Robert Mueller’s letter criticizing Barr’s four-page summary of the special counsel’s report.
“I know there are some people who don’t think this March 27 letter is a big deal,” Wallace said. “Some opinion people, some opinion people who appear on this network, who may be pushing a political agenda.”
He went on: “But, you know, we have to deal in facts. And the fact is that this letter from the special counsel, and it was one of at least three contacts with the Attorney General between March 25 and March 27, was a clear indication that [Mueller] was upset, very upset, with the letter that had been sent out by the Attorney General, and wanted it changed, or wanted it at least added to, and the Attorney General refused to do so. He felt the Attorney General’s letter was inaccurate.”
The context for this isn’t hard to find. Wednesday morning, Wallace appeared on Fox News and said the letter created a problem for Barr, whose choice to keep it secret left some feeling as if he’d “misled the country on the essential contents of the report.” Laura Ingraham, one of Fox’s “opinion people,” disagreed. She called into the network’s prehearing coverage and said Mueller’s letter is a “nonstory.” Then she called out Wallace by name:
Wallace’s rant followed a few hours later.
Adam K. Raymond



May 2, 2019
Why Democrats Will Almost Certainly Hold the House in 2020

For worry-wart Democrats who fret about the political future, these are tough times. Thanks to a growing economy, Donald Trump isn’t the toasted lame duck he might have appeared to be as his party was getting crushed in the 2018 midterms. And Democratic prospects for taking back the Senate aren’t getting any better either, as at least three of Chuck Schumer’s prize 2020 prospects — Beto O’Rourke, Stacey Abrams and Cindy Axne (an Iowa congresswoman) — have taken a pass on running for the upper chamber.
But at least there’s relatively little reason for Democrats to fear another Republican trifecta like the one they woke up to in November of 2016. As Charlie Cook explains, a flip of the House in 2020 would break all sorts of historical precedents:
Cook also points out that members of a party that has lost its House majority tend to retire in relatively high numbers, which should produce some open seats ripe for the plucking by Democrats. The only thing the Donkey Party should probably worry about is overexposure in Trump Country: the 2018 midterms left only three Republican incumbents standing in districts carried by Clinton in 2016, while 31 Democrats will defend seats in districts carried by Trump. But then again, even if Trump is reelected, it will likely be with a far-from-a-majority popular vote (Republican strategies are privately conceding that Trump’s chances of even winning the popular vote are very limited) and few, if any, coattails. With Republicans needing a net gain of roughly 20 seats (they currently have 197 of the 218 needed for a majority, with three vacancies), they’d need more help than Trump is likely to give them while he concentrates on saving his own orange hide.
So modest GOP House gains are entirely possible, unless Trump gets beaten badly, in which case it could go the other way (just as Democrats gained 21 House seats in 2008 after gaining 32 and flipping the House in 2006).
Things could change, but all in all, it looks like Nancy Pelosi will get to keep her Speaker’s gavel until 2022, when she is expected to retire subsequent to a term-limit deal she cut to head off a 2018 challenge (a deal which will probably protect her in 2020 as well).  If Trump’s still in office, she’ll have a couple more State of the Union Address to look down on him with amusement and disdain.
Ed Kilgore



May 2, 2019
2021 Could Be a Nightmare for Democrats — Even If Trump Loses

Winter has come. The air stings your skin as you shuffle toward the National Mall. But there are scattered patches of blue in the sky, and sunlight peeking out from behind a cloud. And the crowd that now surrounds you is alive with good cheer. Your fellow Americans are high off civic pride, or their proximity to future history, or possibly marijuana (your nose is stuffy, but you think you think can smell a trace of something skunky on the wind).
He emerges from the Capitol Building. The crowd goes wild. You join their cheer, but can’t make out your own voice above the din. And now you’re not even sure what it is they’re chanting. But you know their words are not your own. You look up at the nearest television monitor and there it is — that awful, orange face.
It all comes back to you in an instant, the flashing images in your mind alternating with the crowd’s chant, like light and darkness beneath a strobe lamp: LOCK HER UP; the Upshot’s needle swinging blue to red; LOCK HER UP; those last 10,000 votes in Waukesha County; LOCK HER UP; the headlines heralding RBG’s death right before Christmas; LOCK HER UP; Supreme Court Justice Sarah Huckabee Sanders; LOCK HER UP; the bombs already falling over Tehran; LOCK HER UP; the president’s face as he signed “The Voting Wrongs Act of 2021”; LOCK HER UP; Elizabeth Warren being led to a squad car in handcuffs; LOCK HER UP; and now, as they turn toward you, their red hats glowing in the winter sun, you realize that you are her, this place is a prison — and your sentence is another four years to life.
Liberals are well-prepared for this kind of “2021 nightmare.” They’ve been fearing it since November 9, 2016. To avert such a terror, they took to the streets in historic numbers the day after Donald Trump’s inauguration, and showed up at the polls en masse last fall. And they’re right to be afraid. Each day, Trump grows a bit more lawless, and the Executive branch a bit less willing to defy him. Another four years of judicial appointments would give the conservative movement a hammerlock on the judiciary for a generation. And in that time, Trump’s judges could rubber-stamp changes to election laws that further erode what remains of popular sovereignty in this republic — and the world’s most powerful nation would stumble four years closer to climate catastrophe.
Trump’s reelection would be a nightmare. But for Democrats, defeating him and winning the presidency in 2021 could be its own kind of horror show.
If a Democrat wins the presidency next year, there’s a good chance he or she won’t be able to do much of anything without Mitch McConnell’s permission.
Right now, the odds of Team Blue winning control of the Senate next year are slim, and getting slimmer. Democrats will need a net gain of three seats next November to wrest the upper chamber from Mitch McConnell’s caucus. And while Republicans will have 22 of their incumbents on the ballot in 2020, only two of those represent states that have leaned Democratic in the past two presidential elections — Colorado and Maine. Which is less than ideal, since winning Maine will (almost certainly) require beating Susan Collins, who has held her seat for more than two decades, and remains quite popular with her constituents (including many of the state’s Democrats). Thus, there is no reason to assume Democrats will be able to win the only two blue-state seats on the board. But let’s be generous and say they do.
Unless Alabama Republicans decide to make a theocratic ephebophile their standard-bearer again (which is highly unlikely), Doug Jones will be evicted from the Senate next November. In a presidential election year and an age of straight-ticket voting, even Roy Moore would have a decent shot of beating a Democrat in the Heart of Dixie.
Even with wins in Colorado and Maine, Team Blue would have only netted one seat, which means they’d have to flip two in light-red territory. CNN’s Harry Enten explains why that’s unlikely:
In other words, even if Democrats win the national popular vote in a 2018-esque landslide, chances are they’ll come up at least one seat short. And did I mention that the party’s best prospective Senate candidates in Georgia, and the “reach” states of Texas and Montana, have all ostensibly decided to launch far-fetched presidential campaigns, instead? Or that Joe Manchin is seriously considering resigning his seat to run for governor in West Virginia, in which case, Democrats will effectively need to flip five seats after they (almost certainly) forfeit the Mountain State and Alabama?
Anything’s possible, of course. Democrats could find stellar candidates in every quasi-competitive state. Far-right weirdos could win GOP primaries in all the right places. Millennials could show up at the polls in 2020 in unprecedented force, and remake America’s electoral math in their image.
But odds are, if a Democrat moves into the Oval Office in 2021, he or she will be faced with a Republican Senate. Which means that he or she will not have the power to appoint any Supreme Court justices or, in all probability, left-leaning federal judges of any kind. And do you really think Senate Republicans are going to help President Elizabeth Warren install her preferred leaders atop the Treasury or SEC?
Imagine a Democratic president who isn’t just too weak to advance any of the ambitious legislation she promised her base, but also to rebalance the courts or effectively implement her regulatory agenda. Might this dampen Democratic voters’ enthusiasm for electoral politics when the midterms come around?
In a February survey conducted by the National Association for Business Economics, 75 percent of economists predicted the U.S. economy would slide into recession by the end of 2021, with 42 percent expecting a downturn next year, and 25 percent the following one. Since that poll was taken, the Federal Reserve backed away from rate hikes, and markets soared. And (since expansions never last forever under capitalism) the odds of the economy going south in 2021 are now higher than ever.
If the bubbles pop shortly after President Buttigieg takes the reins, it will be imperative for him to pass some kind of fiscal stimulus; with interest rates already near historic lows, the Federal Reserve’s capacity to mitigate a downturn through monetary policy will be limited.
In this scenario, do you think Mitch McConnell will put country before party and approve a bipartisan stimulus package to prevent the slump from deepening — or will he decide that deficits are bad again? History says this shouldn’t even be a question.
So we’re looking at a historically ineffectual president who has failed to deliver on any of his or her major campaign promises, and is presiding over a needlessly severe recession.
In this scenario, how excited will the progressive base be to turn out for the Democratic Party in 2022? Once gridlock replaces Donald Trump in the headlines, is it easier to imagine liberals sustaining their current levels of civic engagement or catching up on lost brunches?
Odds are, complacency and disillusionment would depress liberal turnout, while revanchist outrage would raise conservative participation, and economic woes would turn swing voters against the party in power. Even relatively effective presidents, presiding over good economic times, tend to lose seats in midterm elections. In the scenario we’ve sketched, a red wave would likely drown the Democrats’ House majority, and allow Republicans to renew their lease on (otherwise potentially flippable) Senate seats in Florida, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Iowa, and Ohio. And the GOP might even flip Democratic seats in New Hampshire and Nevada while they’re at it.
The 2022 Senate map is the friendliest that Democrats are likely to see until those same seats come up again in 2028. If Republicans win big in 2022, the Senate could very well be theirs until the end of the decade. Barring a revolution in the GOP’s internal politics, that would mean no major climate legislation at the federal level until it’s much too late.
Meanwhile, when 2024 rolls around, Republicans will be one branch of government shy of a trifecta, and the Democratic incumbent will have no real achievements to run on. And next time, the GOP’s proto-authoritarian standard-bearer just might know how to stay on message.
This second-worst-case scenario is far from inevitable. One could quibble with every link in its chain of logic. Donald Trump is a historically unpopular president. The turnout rate among voters under 30 was 79 percent higher last year than during the previous midterm election. There remains a decent chance that the U.S. economy will enter a recession next year. Thus, it is possible that Democrats will engineer a 2020 landslide large enough to secure them full control of Congress. And even if they don’t, Mitch McConnell could have trouble preventing two or three of his caucus’s more moderate members from cutting deals with a Democratic president. If a recession does hit in 2021, it could very well be a minor affair, in which case, the economy could be growing at a good clip when voters head to the polls in 2022.
And, of course, even the most nightmarish version of the next Democratic presidency is preferable to another four years of Donald Trump.
Nevertheless, progressives shouldn’t lose sight of the lesser nightmare. If the past three years of political history have taught us anything, it’s the virtue of planning for the worst. And envisioning how the next Democratic presidency could go horribly wrong is a prerequisite, both for preventing such an outcome, and preparing to mitigate its most dire effects. Regarding the former, Team Blue’s leadership must convey the profound stakes of next year’s Senate elections to their highly energized — but presidency-obsessed — base. The small-dollar armies that are currently powering so many dark-horse presidential bids must eventually spread the wealth down-ballot. Democratic elected officials, for their part, must recognize that their party’s agenda will have no future unless the legislative filibuster becomes history.
Big-dollar Democratic donors, meanwhile, need to devote more time and money to developing an answer to their party’s deep, structural problem in the Senate — namely, that as urban-rural polarization deepens, the upper chamber is becoming more biased toward rural voters, and the GOP is growing less willing to accept the Democratic Party’s right to govern. Part of the answer here will be to find messages, organizations, and trusted local leaders who can improve Team Blue’s performance in low-density areas. But rural regions are drifting right in democracies all across the West. It’s unlikely that the trend can be fully reversed. Thus, more audacious solutions must be entertained. The next time Democrats eke out a Senate majority, approving statehood for D.C. — and, if the people of the island want it, Puerto Rico — must be a priority. Meanwhile, America’s bleeding-heart billionaires should consider trying to replicate the right’s success in buying up TV news outlets, and peppering their regular content with propaganda. They might also mull making investments in start-up incubators, or liberal arts colleges in low-population, light-red states. Helping Missoula become the new Austin might not sound like a political project. But turning Montana blue through targeted investments would get a Democratic donor way more bang for her political buck than, say, a national television campaign in favor of impeachment.
Finally, liberal activists must prepare for the possibility that legislative progress at the federal level might not be possible for a long time. Thus, they must redouble their efforts to make state-level change, and exploit the Democrats’ control over California for all its worth; which is to say, they should continue making strict environmental and labor standards the price of admission for corporations that wish to do business in the world’s fifth-largest economy.
By the end of next year, our long national nightmare might be over. But if we aren’t careful, a new one will promptly take its place. If you want a picture of the future, imagine a Republican Senate majority stamping on a human face — forever.
Eric Levitz



May 1, 2019
Jeopardy! Champ James Holzhauer Isn’t Sure Who Senator Ben Sasse Is

One would imagine that James Holzhauer — the person whose “strategically aggressive” strategy effectively broke Jeopardy! — would have memorized all sitting U.S. senators as a precaution. But on Monday night, Holzhauer and his fellow contestants failed to give the question to the following $2,000 answer in the “Social Studies” category: “He’s a senator from Nebraska and the author of Them: Why We Hate Each Other and How to Heal.” Holzhauer & Co. failed to answer even with Sasse’s mug in front of the clue.
The miss reveals that the pro sports bettor has something of a knowledge gap: Of the 32 other clues he’s missed or gotten wrong during his 20-game win streak, many have had to do with politics or history. Other errors include guesses on the Spanish Civil War, Nelson Mandela, and the Bill of Rights.
For future reference, Sasse is a first-term Republican in the Judiciary and Intelligence committees whose email accounts were once signed up to a Nickelback newsletter. Despite physical similarities — and a shared tendency to condemn the president but vote in his favor — he is not, in fact, former Arizona senator Jeff Flake.
Matt Stieb



May 1, 2019
Barr Refuses to Testify Before House Judiciary Committee on Thursday

After Bill Barr’s trying day of accountability in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee for his egregiously biased handling of the Mueller report, the attorney general informed the House Judiciary Committee that he would not appear for his hearing as scheduled on Thursday.
The immediate logic is obvious. Barr, a ruthlessly competent partisan, testified before the Senate committee, where he would enjoy the aid of its chairman, Lindsey Graham. With Democrats running the show in the House, the line of questioning would be even less forgiving. Barr cited the House committee’s vote to allow staff lawyers to question him for an additional hour as the reason for his cancellation. The Justice Department defended Barr’s decision, claiming that it would be inappropriate for congressional staffers to grill a member of Trump’s Cabinet.
“I understand why he wants to avoid that kind of scrutiny,” House Judiciary Committee chairman Jerrold Nadler said. “He is terrified of having to face a skilled attorney.” Nadler added that he would seek to hold Barr in contempt of Congress if he does not turn over the unredacted Mueller report “in the next day or two.” (Also on Wednesday, the chairman said that he anticipates that May 15 is the day the Judiciary committee will request that Robert Mueller testify.)
Justice Department spokeswoman Kerri Kupec stated that the House Judiciary’s decision to allow staff lawyer questioning created “unprecedented and unnecessary” conditions for the hearing. However, as Nadler clarified, staff lawyers had interviewed witnesses during the impeachment proceedings of Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton — two of the past presidential scandals that have set the template for the proceedings of Mueller’s special counsel.
Barr’s decision will certainly raise calls for his resignation from Democrats; among those already doing so are Adam Schiff, Elizabeth Warren, Julián Castro, and Beto O’Rourke. It’s a call that Barr will almost certainly ignore.
Matt Stieb



May 1, 2019
Educators Leave Their Mark on International Workers’ Day

The first of May is International Workers’ Day for the labor movement and the left. Though the day has origins in the mid-to-late-19th-century movement for an eight-hour workday, it’s also come to commemorate the Haymarket riots in Chicago, which followed the murders of picketing workers by police on May 3, 1886. Seven policemen and four workers died in riots the following day. Eight anarchists were later tried, and four hanged, for their alleged involvement in the use of a bomb during the riots, but there was little-to-no evidence connecting any of them to the crime.
Over 130 years later, International Workers’ Day has become a world holiday, though it’s not formally recognized as such in the U.S. The day remains a flashpoint for labor action and for celebratory demonstrations of worker solidarity, and this year, the RedforEd movement left a definitive mark on the holiday. Around 10,000 public educators in South Carolina marched in the state capital today, demanding smaller class sizes, higher pay, and reduced standardized testing. Clad in the now-familiar red shirts of the RedforEd movement, they sang “We’re Not Gonna Take It” in front of the state Department of Education.
On Twitter, high-profile Democratic candidates for president expressed support for South Carolina educators and, more broadly, for International Workers’ Day:
South Carolina educators weren’t the only educators to stage May Day demonstrations. In North Carolina, some teachers walked out of school for the second year in a row to demand Medicaid expansion, the hiring of more school support staff like nurses and counselors, and a $15 minimum wage for all education workers, among other issues. Last month, the Raleigh News & Observer reported that the four largest school districts in North Carolina had preemptively canceled classes for May 1; on the same date in 2018, teachers successfully shut down 42 school districts with a similar walkout. In Chicago, meanwhile, the Chicago Teachers Union is preparing for what it’s calling the nation’s first-ever multi-employer charter-school strike. “More unionized charter schools could join the strike in the coming days if progress is not made at the bargaining table,” the union announced in a press release. At 5 p.m. CST, American Federation of Teachers president Randi Weingarten will join educators and union leaders at the ChiArts school to kick off the union’s latest strike. Chicago was also the scene of the nation’s first-ever charter-school strike, which affected Acero charter schools in December.
At Harvard University, graduate-student workers are holding their own May Day protest. The students, who are members of the United Automobile Workers, have occupied University Hall to draw attention to what they say is the university’s failure to “to provide student workers with key protections from harassment and discrimination following a series of troubling, high-profile incidents and a reported 55 percent increase in harassment complaints on campus.” Though graduate students voted to unionize in April 2018, the union says on its website that Harvard’s administration did not “adequately meet” with its bargaining committee until October. Student workers still have no union contract. “We are exercising our rights as workers to demand protections for harassment and discrimination because, while Harvard is a world class institution, it has a world class #MeToo problem,” Sophie Hill, a graduate student in government, said in a press release issued by the union. “Right now, my colleagues inside University Hall are not being allowed to go to the bathroom, but we are standing strong. The Administration needs to provide a contract now.”
At least one union is holding off on strike plans for now. District Council 1707 AFSCME, which represents some preschool educators in New York City, told the press on Wednesday that it has “agreed to call off the strike and rally scheduled for Thursday, May 2, and agreed to refrain from striking while the discussions are ongoing.” Both of the union’s locals had previously voted to authorize a one-day strike over pay parity; educators in community-run preschools said they are paid far less than their colleagues in public schools, despite their inclusion in Mayor Bill de Blasio’s universal pre-K program.
Sarah Jones



May 1, 2019
Get Ready for a Biden Swoon, Sooner or Later

The “Biden bounce” — an impressive and surprising surge of support for the former veep in multiple national polls in the wake of his formal announcement of candidacy — was all the buzz in political circles yesterday. But the residual question is whether it can last or, better yet for Biden, flower into something like an unassailable lead over his gigantic field of rivals.
Now there’s a common species of Twitter scold who becomes furious at the very question on the grounds that “horse-race polls” so far in advance of elections are “meaningless,” and that writing about them is what’s wrong with American politics and media blah blah bark bark woof woof. As it happens, Geoffrey Skelley recently went through the process of looking at early-nomination-contest polling dating back to 1972 (!), and discovered that such polls taken the year before a presidential election often have high predictive value. That’s particularly true for strong early front-runners.
Biden’s latest national poll standings (ranging from the mid-to-high 30s) is in the area that is correlated with eventual victory in a majority of cases. Since some of his “bounce” is probably temporary (nearly all major candidates get some sort of post-launch bounce), it is probably more accurate to say Biden is on the borderline between being a strong favorite to win the nomination and just a good-but-hardly-safe bet.
But if you examine the recent history of nomination contests, you quickly discover a phenomenon that is easy to miss if you only focus on early polls and final results: Early front-runners often go through a swoon in popularity, or even a political near-death experience, somewhere along the way. And some don’t survive at all.
Consider these examples:
* In early 1979, Ronald Reagan was about where Biden is today in the polls, albeit with more deeply entrenched support, given his long service to the conservative movement and his strong challenge to incumbent President Gerald Ford in 1976. Reagan lost the Iowa caucuses to George H.W. Bush in an upset, and appeared to be in trouble until he beat Poppy in New Hampshire after running a strongly ideological campaign there.
* In early 1983, Fritz Mondale — another former vice-president — was also registering poll numbers similar to Biden’s. And his polling grew stronger later in 2003. He eventually won the nomination, but not until Gary Hart threw him off track by winning New Hampshire and five other early primaries.
* In the 1988 Democratic nomination contest, Gary Hart was in the mid-30s in early 1987 polls, before imploding entirely and dropping out of the race in May when an extramarital dalliance was revealed (he eventually reentered the contest, but was not a serious factor).
* In the 1988 Republican nomination contest, Poppy Bush was in the high 30s in the polls in the first half of 1987, and got stronger later that year.  But then he finished third in Iowa, trailing both Bob Dole and Pat Robertson, before beating Dole in New Hampshire by hammering away at Dole’s refusal to take a “no tax increase” pledge (which Bush did, to his eventual regret years later).
* In 1996, Dole was the heavy Republican front-runner early on, averaging well over 40 percent in 1987 polls. But he again lost New Hampshire (this time to Pat Buchanan) and then lost to Steve Forbes in Delaware and Arizona before righting the ship.
* Throughout 1999, George W. Bush was crushing his rivals in the polls, registering over 60 percent in the second half of that year. He stumbled in New Hampshire against John McCain before recovering via a scorched-earth negative campaign against McCain in South Carolina.
* Hillary Clinton was polling in the high 30s in early 2007, and the low 40s later that year. She lost her mojo to Barack Obama in Iowa, of course, and needed to win her own upset in New Hampshire in order to survive to make the 2008 contest an extended slugfest.
* That same cycle, Rudy Giuliani was polling in the low 30s in the first half of 2007, and faded from sight steadily after voters started voting.
As you can see, there are extensive precedents for early front-runners hitting major bumps and then righting themselves — or having the wheels fall right off. What this suggests about Joe Biden is that his current standing, assuming it doesn’t decline right away, is meaningful, but he and we can count on bad things happening to him along the road to Milwaukee. Democrats’ current proportional delegate award system makes a front-runner’s margin for error lower than it was in the old days, when an Establishment favorite could fatten up on winner-take-all primaries against a divided field of challengers. If a contested-convention scenario actually materializes, the key question could be whether it’s Biden or someone else (Harris? Warren? Booker? O’Rourke?) who is the logical unity candidate.
More generally, Biden’s ability to handle the inevitable adversity he will face could matter a lot, particularly if he commits one of his famous gaffes or has something really damaging arise from his many decades in public office at about the same time a particular rival rises like a rocket to challenge him.Strong early-nomination-contest polling is meaningful, but no guarantee of anything other than fond memories.
Ed Kilgore



May 1, 2019
Joe Biden Should Retire the Phrase ‘Dignity of Work’

Joe Biden’s presidential campaign is less than a week old, but the former vice-president is already positioning himself as the candidate of blue-collar America, with some success. In a move they first signaled weeks ago, the International Association of Firefighters have already endorsed Biden. The candidate packed a Pittsburgh Teamsters hall at his official campaign kickoff on Monday. There, he described himself as a “union man,” and said that the “dignity of work is my measure.” He returned to that refrain again in remarks to Iowa voters on Tuesday. As he delivered a pitch for his health-care proposal — which consists, right now, of the option to buy into Medicare — Biden spoke again of the dignity of work:
Biden’s use of the term immediately earned comparisons to Ohio senator Sherrod Brown, who recently concluded his Dignity of Work tour with the announcement that he would not run for president. But while Brown may have popularized the phrase in recent weeks, he didn’t coin it. Conservatives and liberals alike refer often to the dignity of work; for both groups, the phrase can function alternatively as a justification for cutting welfare in the name of personal responsibility, or as a stand-in for workers’ rights. Biden himself has used the phrase in older speeches, a tendency that may reflect his Catholic faith; Catholic social teaching holds that there is dignity in all work. “My parents taught us to live our faith and to treasure our families. We learned the dignity of work, and we were told that anyone can make it if they just try hard enough. That was America’s promise,” Biden told crowds at the 2008 Democratic National Convention. Barack Obama, he added, understood that “work is more than a paycheck. It’s dignity. It’s respect. It’s about whether or not you can look your children in the eye and say: We’re going to be all right.”
Ten years after he delivered that speech to rapt Democratic delegates, Biden seemingly believes that its message will still resonate with voters. And he may be right. Unemployment is low, but in other respects, the average American worker lives in challenging times. Though the labor market is tightening, wage growth is slow, and it isn’t evenly distributed to all workers. The Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning think tank, reported in February that wage growth has largely been concentrated in the top ten percent of high-wage workers since 2007. Overall, wage growth hasn’t kept pace with rising rents or with medical expenses; a 2018 Kaiser Family Foundation poll found that employers are gradually shifting more medical costs to workers, as insurance premiums continue to rise.
But America’s persistent economic inequities also put Biden in a difficult position. Key moments in his long record of public service undermine his professed commitment to the American worker and raise questions about how exactly he defines the dignity of work — whether he believes dignity rests in work itself, or whether it flows instead from the human beings who perform that work.
The national wealth gap did not spring to life the moment Donald Trump took the oath of office. Though Obama is hardly responsible for the recession of 2008, and wealth inequality had already begun to worsen by the time he and Biden entered the White House, Reuters reported in 2015 that during the Obama presidency, the economy had added jobs at the top and bottom of the wage scale, but not the middle. Income gains made over the course of the nation’s recovery from the recession weren’t evenly distributed, either. Reuters, citing the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances, found that “the average net worth of families in the top 40 percent of income earners grew” from 2010 to 2013; for everyone else, incomes declined. The Affordable Care Act is a notable bright spot, as it extended necessary affordable health-care coverage to millions of Americans without it, but the home foreclosure crisis is a stain on Obama’s inequality record. “Obama the candidate ran on allowing bankruptcy judges to cut balances on primary mortgages; Obama’s administration actively whipped against the policy,” David Dayen ably argued in a 2016 piece for the Atlantic. “Obama’s transition team earmarked up to $100 billion in funds appropriated through Bush’s bank bailout to mitigate foreclosures; eight years later only around $21 billion has been spent. Obama the president promised 4 million mortgage modifications; to date less than a million have been successfully achieved.”
As Obama’s vice-president, Biden can’t exactly argue against his complicity in the administration’s foreclosure failures. His record in the U.S. Senate implicates him even more directly in America’s inequality crisis. Senator Elizabeth Warren had good reason to accuse Biden of “being on the side of the credit-card companies” at a recent Iowa rally. As Business Insider reported in April, Warren referred to a 2005 fight over the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention Consumer Protection Act. Biden championed it, but Warren testified against it in her capacity as a Harvard Law School professor, arguing that it would make it more difficult for individuals to file for personal bankruptcy without penalizing credit-card companies for predatory lending practices. Biden enthusiastically supported Bill Clinton’s welfare-reform bill, which tied benefits to work, and which has, according to some research, exacerbated levels of deep poverty in the U.S.
Even some of Biden’s noneconomic policies, like his stance on crime, have had a negative impact on inequality. He spent decades championing the war on drugs, and wrote 1994’s Violent Crime and Law Enforcement Act, which increased the number of death-penalty offenses and contributed to an increase in mass incarceration while doing little to reduce violent crime. People born into poverty are more likely to spend time in prison, and incarceration itself has been linked to poverty; the tough-on-crime policies that Biden supported helped put millions of mostly brown and black Americans in a trap from which there are few means of escape.
Biden’s notion of bankruptcy reform didn’t assault the dignity of work. Neither did welfare reform, nor did the crime bill. Instead, these laws assaulted human beings in need. Biden’s own record reveals his catchphrase to be not just a cliché, but a cliché that links human dignity to a rigid definition of human productivity. As campaign rhetoric, it invokes arguments for welfare reform, which frame government assistance like it’s a toxin that sickens everyone who encounters it. For policy to meaningfully improve the lives of Americans suffering under the nation’s inequalities, it must reframe dignity as a human quality with no relationship to a person’s work or to their lack of it. There is no dignity to labor that human beings themselves do not bestow on it. But at certain significant moments in his career, Biden championed policies and systems that ignore, and diminish, that basic human dignity. Most incarcerated people, for example, work for less than a dollar an hour, Vox reported in 2018. Nobody loses their dignity when prison bars close in behind them, they simply enter a system where authorities pretend that dignity doesn’t exist.
Americans don’t need further grandstanding about the purported dignity of work. They need policy reforms that reflect the innate dignity of human life, and Joe Biden isn’t the candidate to deliver them.
Sarah Jones



May 1, 2019
Barr: It’s Not Obstruction of Justice If the Obstruction Works

The most illuminating moment in William Barr’s Senate testimony came when he elucidated the bizarre theory of presidential immunity that got him the job in the first place. If an investigation is “based on false allegations, the president does not have to sit there constitutionally and allow it to run its course,” Barr explained. “That is important, because most of the obstruction claims that are being made here, or episodes here, do involve the exercise of the president’s constitutional authority. And we do know now that he was being falsely accused.”
This argument stacks several astonishing assumptions atop each other to produce a perverse conclusion. First, Trump could not possibly know that an investigation was unfounded, because it covered his entire campaign. Indeed, his first attempt to obstruct the inquiry came on behalf of Michael Flynn. Trump did not and could not know everything Flynn had done. He claims not to know much about the various contacts with Russia made by his subordinates, including the Trump Tower meeting. So the whole premise that Trump could know the investigation was groundless is not even a theoretically plausible description of his motives.
Second, Mueller did not say Trump was innocent, and nothing about the report concludes he or his subordinates were “falsely accused.” The report simply notes Mueller did not establish crimes at the level of certainty needed to prove them in a court of law. But it left much of the underlying conduct unresolved — exactly what Roger Stone said to WikiLeaks, or why Paul Manafort gave 75 pages of detailed polling to a Russian agent during the campaign, Mueller could not nail down.
Barr at times discusses these conclusions with the legal standard of a court of law. At one point in the hearing, he denied ever having “exonerated” the president. But then he toggles into far broader language, declaring Trump innocent and all suspicions false.
And third, Trump’s obstruction was quite possibly one of the reasons Mueller failed to establish underlying crimes. The president dangled pardons to numerous figures, including Stone and Manafort, the two Trump advisers who had the most direct cooperation with Russians, both of whom refused to cooperate with Mueller.
Barr’s argument is that the president can decide an investigation is unfair and shut it down, thereby preventing it from proving underlying crimes, and then use the lack of proof of underlying crimes to justify his behavior. By the standard Barr is articulating, Trump can probably get away with all the crimes he wants as long as his obstruction of justice succeeds.
Jonathan Chait



May 1, 2019
The New ‘Infrastructure Deal’ Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things

The Trump administration is furiously spinning newly revealed proof of its corruption, so you know it’s “Infrastructure Week” again. And this time around, the president’s quest to fix our nation’s crumbling roads and bridges — or look like he’s trying — actually has a bit of traction.
On Tuesday, Donald Trump had a bizarrely constructive meeting with the Democratic congressional leadership, wherein both sides agreed that the federal government should make a $2 trillion investment in America’s infrastructure. No details were sweated. And over the ensuing 24 hours, congressional Republicans have blanched at the policy’s price tag, while some Democrats have insisted that new spending must be paid for by rolling back Trump’s tax cuts on high-earners.
Nevertheless, some observers might take heart at the mere existence of bipartisan negotiations over how to address a genuine policy challenge. But they shouldn’t. The new round of infrastructure talks does not exemplify what’s still “working” in Washington; rather, it embodies three of the biggest problems in American politics today.
Earlier this week, Chuck Schumer announced that he wouldn’t even consider supporting a hike in the gas tax — the traditional mechanism for funding highway improvements — until Republicans agreed to pare back some of the tax cuts they showered on the wealthy and corporations in 2017.
Having put their party’s idea for how to finance an infrastructure package on the table, Democrats now insist that the president tell them whose taxes he would like to raise instead. And Trump almost certainly won’t do that — because his party will not let him propose taxes on the wealthy, and his political acumen won’t allow him to call for tax hikes on the middle class.
If both parties answered primarily to their own voters, this would not be a sticking point. Before Republicans passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017, polls showed a majority of GOP voters opposed lowering taxes on corporations or high-earners. And by all appearances, the White House’s internal research showed the same. “Tax reform will protect low-income and middle-income households, not the wealthy and well-connected,” President Trump assured supporters in a speech in Indiana in September 2017. “They can call me all they want. It’s not going to help. I’m doing the right thing, and it’s not good for me. Believe me.” National Economic Council director Gary Cohn went further, promising, “The wealthy are not getting a tax cut under our plan.” Three months later, the White House celebrated the passage of a tax-cut package that delivered the lion’s share of its benefits to the top one percent.
Raising taxes on the rich is popular with the typical Republican voter and with the kinds of swing voters Donald Trump will need to win in the Rust Belt next year. Investing in infrastructure is, too. By offering to support a $2 trillion infrastructure package — funded by progressive taxation — Democrats are effectively offering to do the Republican president a huge political favor. They are giving him a chance to pass hugely popular, bipartisan legislation — that would earn him effusive praise from the mainstream media and validate his populism (and/or status as an unconventional Republican) to former Democrats in the Midwest — right before he runs for reelection.
If the GOP were a political party devoted to maximizing its vote share — without betraying its voting base — it would see Schumer’s pay-for demand as a wet kiss, not a poison pill. But the GOP is not such a party. Its overriding priority is to concentrate economic power in the hands of its largest shareholders. So it refuses to support popular legislation that would cost rich people money — even when doing so would aid a majority of Republican voters, and increase the party’s prospects for winning elections. As a result, the party must rely on obscuring the material implications of its agenda by stoking conservative social alienation and white racial paranoia. Which is the main reason why our republic can’t have nice things.
Some of the Democratic Party’s leaders are handling these negotiations competently. If your goal is to project an image of reasonableness — without actually helping Trump score a legislative win that’ll boost his reelection hopes — then calling for a giant, progressively financed infrastructure package makes good sense. Why not make Trump a popular offer he can’t accept?
But not everyone in the party is onboard. A significant number of moderates in Nancy Pelosi’s caucus appear to actually want to reach a compromise with their Republican colleagues. For these lawmakers, scoring some pork for their home districts — and demonstrating their bipartisan bona fides — is well worth the risk of helping Trump secure another four years in power. As Politico reports:
In an interview with the Daily Beast, a senior Democratic aide spelled out the implications of DeFazio’s “realism” more plainly:
This reasoning reflects two of the Democratic Party’s worst pathologies: Its refusal to think critically about the implications of the Republican Party’s extremism, and its members’ myopic refusal to put Team Blue’s interests above their own.
Who gives a fuck about whether passing a (watered-down, regressively funded) infrastructure plan would help a lawless, openly racist president win reelection? Who gives a fuck about whether the price of winning a gold star from “No Labels” is another six-dozen 40-year-old reactionaries appointed to the judiciary, and an anti-choice majority consolidated on the Supreme Court? I would imagine some of the Democratic Party’s constituents might deem these questions worthy of consideration — because they are capable of recognizing that politics is war by other means, not a rarified form of elite performance art.
This senior aide is ostensibly aware that America’s state and federal governments are primarily controlled by a political party that puts “politics ahead of getting something done” for the public. If the GOP is such a pathological party, then how could it not be in the interest of one’s constituents to make disempowering the GOP a top governing priority? As is so often the case on the left side of the aisle, the high-minded rhetoric here is just camouflage for self-interested myopia. Some swing-district Democrats have focus-group data that suggest they can marginally increase the probability of reelection by helping Trump pass an infrastructure bill. So who fucking cares what implications that might have for Dreamers, or voting rights, or the rule of law? Who fucking cares whether refusing to match the procedural radicalism of one’s rivals gives them a structural advantage in political competition? We came here to make friends, not to win power.
A less virulent strain of this feckless myopia can be seen in the party’s inability to persuade its rising stars to run for the Senate instead of the presidency.
In this specific context, due to the political considerations outlined above, this is probably for the best. But it’s nevertheless insane that both sides in the infrastructure debate are proceeding from the premise that the package must be fully “paid for.”
It’s idiotic to liken the federal government’s finances to those of a household or business, since the former can print the world’s reserve currency, while the latter cannot. But even by Congress’s own delusional “a business needs to balance its books so Uncle Sam should, too” logic, opposing deficit-financed capital improvements makes no sense. Businesses issue debt to make investments in productivity-enhancing capital all the time! On the state and local level — where governments actually do face tight fiscal constraints — lawmakers draft separate capital budgets out of recognition that such investments are categorically distinct from other forms of government spending, and can be responsibly funded through borrowing.
You don’t need to accept Modern Monetary Theory to understand that — at a time of historically low interest rates and stubbornly low inflation — there is nothing irresponsible about borrowing money to fix your substandard transportation systems. Larry Summers is no one’s idea of a wild-eyed radical, and he’s been endorsing an infrastructure stimulus for years now.
Republicans accept the principle that deficit-financed policies can “pay for” themselves by increasing long-term growth when the policy in question is a tax cut — which is to say, they accept the principle in contexts where it has no empirical support. But ask them to apply this logic to investments in productivity-enhancing infrastructure, and they’ll tell you to get “realistic”:
Democrats are scarcely better. Even Bernie Sanders insists (publicly anyway) that deficit spending is inherently wrong. And a good number of House Democrats recently called for adding a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution — an economically illiterate idea that would devastate the U.S. economy.
All of which is to say: In many respects, our elected leadership lives every week like it’s “Infrastructure Week.” And our government is crumbling into dysfunction as a result.
Eric Levitz



May 1, 2019
Comey Calls Trump a Devourer of Souls

In an extraordinarily well-timed piece of commentary — given Attorney General William Barr’s efforts before the Senate Judiciary Committee to defend the shreds of honor he retains after 11 weeks as Donald Trump’s attorney general — the New York Times published an op-ed by former FBI director James Comey that probes the president’s technique for submitting subordinates to his will. Comey has never made a secret of his disdain for Trump. But now he’s turning his attention to people he once deeply respected to explore — not without sympathy — why they’ve now lost his respect in Trump’s service.
Mentioning Barr and Rod Rosenstein (who, it should be noted, recommended that Comey be fired in order to please the king by slaying a meddlesome subordinate) in particular, Comey doesn’t mince words:
Comey admits he felt the president gnawing at his own soul:
Again, Comey cites Mattis as the honorable exception to the general rule of self-corruption:
Comey writes knowingly of the rationalizations that people around Trump — and his allies in Congress — deploy to forgive themselves for what they know is cooperation in serial lies and travesties, and to avoid being caught out in their hypocrisy by the ever-suspicious, jealous god in the Oval Office. That leads to more insincere flattery of the all-powerful and infallible one, and very quickly to the inability to maintain any integrity. “And then you are lost. He has eaten your soul.”
I certainly cannot recall any former high-ranking government official ever describing a president and his top officials with this sort of language. When you remember that Comey was until recently a Republican careerist and a close associate of many of those who still serve this president and the party he has conquered, it’s that much more remarkable. It offers somber mood music to the spectacle we are all witnessing as the Trump administration bullies its way through crimes and misdemeanors and intensely polarizing rhetoric in hopes of winning the Devourer of Souls a second term as president.
Ed Kilgore



May 1, 2019
Why America Needs More Movies Like John Singleton’s Rosewood

In 1923, the predominantly black town of Rosewood, Florida, was burned to the ground. White locals had become convinced that a black drifter had raped a white woman and sought vengeance against their black neighbors, killing at least six and as many as 27 of them. It was not an isolated attack: Rosewood’s fate mirrored that of more than a dozen black communities in the late 1910s and early 1920s, during the 73-year stretch of vigilante violence known as “the lynching era,” which claimed at least 4,000 lives from 1877 to 1950. Black sections of Longview, Texas, and Tulsa, Oklahoma, had been razed by white mobs under similar circumstances in 1919 and 1921, respectively. Both communities survived their massacres. Rosewood was wiped off the face of the earth.
Survivors who fled Rosewood were silent about their ordeal in public until local reporters stumbled across their story in the early 1980s. News and magazine reports followed. National interest grew as the victims’ descendants initiated a claims case against the state of Florida for failing to protect their families. They launched a media blitz to draw attention, discussing the killings on news programs and daytime talk shows including 60 Minutes and The Maury Povich Show. The lawsuit fizzled, but state legislators took up the case, commissioning a study aimed at determining reparations. Between 1994 and 1995, Florida awarded the Rosewood survivors $150,000 each. Nine of them were alive to collect.
Cinema thrives on dramatizing perseverance, so it is remarkable how few films exist about black Americans’ experiences with white terrorism. One reason for this paucity is that these stories subvert Hollywood’s myth-making function — the lynching era is harder to shroud in heroism than, say, frontiersman-ship or fighting in the Second World War. But John Singleton forced his audiences to confront it anyway. Six years and three feature films after writing and directing the Oscar-nominated drama Boyz n the Hood in 1991, the South Central Los Angeles native — who died on Monday at age 51 — decided to bring the story of Rosewood to the silver screen. The eponymously titled result is far from perfect. It condescends to its audience by plopping the plot of a Western in the middle of an otherwise affecting portrait of black community and racism in the 1920s. But it accomplishes a feat that few other films have: telling the truth about what was required — beyond the law — to maintain America’s racist hierarchy during the period between emancipation and the civil-rights movement.
The value of such a feat is perhaps self-evident, but as further confirmation of its importance, it should be noted that historical films often serve as popular record. A 2009 study about historical education from Washington University in St. Louis found that films about history help students retain lessons, but often supersede those lessons in their memories if the information they contain contradicts that in historical texts. In the same way that Amadeus (1984) etched in popular consciousness that Mozart was a childish boor — despite historical evidence to the contrary — misleading or absent cinematic depictions of black hardship between the Civil War and the civil-rights era have left a gap filled by misinformation and propaganda. The urtext of post–Civil War white-supremacist terrorism on film — D.W. Griffith’s silent epic Birth of a Nation (1915) — depicts the Ku Klux Klan not as villains, but as valiant protectors of the Old South against the purported vice and corruption of black political leadership during Reconstruction.
The Klan in Singleton’s Rosewood (1997) is undoubtedly villainous, but its villainy pales compared to that of the region’s more ordinary white residents. White hoods are seen in a handful of scenes dispersed among mobs peopled more frequently by local workers and sheriff’s deputies, unmasked and unabashed. The carnivalesque atmosphere that defined many lynchings is on vivid display. Killers pose in broad daylight in front of incinerated black corpses while photographers take pictures. Women and children picnic at the feet of black bodies hanging from trees. Local law enforcement deputizes white locals to hunt down an escaped black prisoner — a figure who never actually materializes in the film, but whose specter serves as a vessel in which whites can store their spiraling racist outrage and then weaponize it against their black neighbors.
Most important, the white people of Rosewood are depicted as human beings rather than caricatures. As was the case in real life, the threat of a neighbor gone berserk was more terrifying for black people — and more likely to occur — than any monster they could imagine. This is not to say that Singleton’s film is a faithful historical portrayal. It arguably exaggerates the reported death toll of the attack, and the Eastwood-esque “Mann” character played by Ving Rhames is a clear and unfortunate fabrication. But the starkest fault in how this era has been portrayed on film is atmospheric and hinges on misleading dynamics — that, for example, racist white people during Jim Crow were inhuman ghouls, or in the case of Griffith’s film, crusaders motivated by patriotism and black defect. Rosewood bucks this trend by depicting lynch mobs as consisting of ordinary human beings brought together, with varying degrees of trepidation, by a vicious practice that was nonetheless normal for its time. It is perhaps the closest an American film gets to an honest assessment of the lynching era. And as a valuable supplement to written materials on the subject, it demythologizes how white community was crafted and affirmed in many parts of the United States.
There should be more films like Rosewood, imperfect though it was — both narrative and documentary. One of Singleton’s most important legacies is that he was one of the few filmmakers who dared to try and had the clout to pull it off. Recent developments like the opening of the National Memorial for Peace and Justice in Montgomery, Alabama, have since affirmed his mission, making the history of lynching more available for public consumption. But more cinematic intervention is warranted too. And 22 years after Rosewood, Singleton’s death casts a harsh light on Hollywood’s failure to meet the challenge.
Zak Cheney-Rice



May 1, 2019
William Barr Keeps Lying About Mueller, and People Keep Trusting Him Anyway

William Barr’s letter summarizing Robert Mueller’s report was a high point in the Trump presidency. It set off wild celebrations in the White House, and inspired Trump and his defenders to declare total vindication in the Russia “Witch Hunt”/”Hoax.”
The letter was also a tightly crafted spin job, selectively presenting the facts in the softest form. The misleading nature of the letter has grown increasingly evident — first as Mueller’s prosecutors leaked complaints, then as the report itself painted a far more damning portrait than Barr allowed, and finally last night as the Washington Post reported Mueller himself objected to Barr’s account.
One conclusion from the report is that Barr clearly misled Congress in his testimony earlier this month. Barr testified on April 9, weeks after receiving Mueller’s letter complaining that Barr’s summary “did not fully capture the context, nature, and substance” of the report. Representative Charlie Crist asked Barr about reports “that members of the special counsel’s team are frustrated at some level with the limited information included in your March 24th letter, that it does not adequately or accurately necessarily portray the report’s findings.”
“Do you know what they’re referencing with that?,” he asked. “No, I don’t,” replied Barr.
At the Senate hearings, Senator Chris Von Hollen asked, “Did Bob Mueller support your conclusion?” Barr replied, “I don’t know whether Bob Mueller supported my conclusion.”
At worst, Barr perjured himself. At best, he deliberately withheld information in order to give a misleading response.
It is a fairly safe assumption that news of Mueller’s written objections to Barr were leaked in advance of Barr’s latest testimony by Barr’s side. The advance leak reduces the explosiveness of what would have been a live revelation, and it also contains explanatory accounts from Barr’s supporters, but not from Mueller’s. The Post’s account summarizes a phone call between Mueller and Barr. It reads an awful lot like Barr’s side of the story:
According to this account, then, Mueller may have written that Barr’s letter mischaracterized the report, but he admitted to Barr he didn’t mean that! He really just meant he disagreed with some news reports about the letter.
Ever hear somebody boast about an argument they had where they destroyed the other guy’s position and forced them to admit they were wrong? This sounds like one of those stories. Mueller wrote that Barr’s letter “did not fully capture the context, nature, and substance” of his work. And the fact that he made the effort to record his objections suggests he had serious grounds for dispute. But apparently Barr got Mueller to admit on the phone that Barr did nothing wrong.
Given all we know about Barr’s behavior, it seems skepticism of the accuracy of the account might be called for. Instead, Trump’s defenders have seized on this part of the story to “prove” that Mueller didn’t really object to Barr’s letter at all:
Again, this line that Mueller supposedly admitted there was nothing misleading in Barr’s letter comes from Justice Department officials who have already mislead the public about Mueller’s position repeatedly.
The fact that Trump’s defenders would invest so much credence in a demonstrably untrustworthy official like Barr shows how much they have invested in Barr’s summary. It is the Barr letter, rather than Mueller’s extremely damning report, upon which they have hinged their claims of vindication.
Jonathan Chait



May 1, 2019
Bill Barr Most Likely Didn’t Commit Perjury, But He Still Misled Congress

The night before Attorney General Bill Barr’s appearance before the Senate Judiciary Committee, a letter from Robert Mueller informing Barr that he objected to his four-page summary of the special counsel investigation leaked to the Washington Post. “There is now public confusion about critical aspects of the results of our investigation,” Mueller reportedly wrote to Barr on March 27. “This threatens to undermine a central purpose for which the Department appointed the Special Counsel: to assure full public confidence in the outcome of the investigations.”
The timely leak drew new attention to a moment from Barr’s previous testimony before the Senate Appropriations Committee. During an April 10 hearing, Maryland senator Chris Van Hollen asked Barr if Mueller supported his four-page summary. Barr said, “I don’t know whether Bob Mueller supported my conclusion.” As House Judiciary Chair Jerrold Nadler and Senator Van Hollen have stated, this suggests an attempt at misdirection, as Barr received the letter two weeks prior to his Senate testimony. Some eager commenters began to claim that the U.S. Attorney General’s April 10 comments could fall under the definition of perjury.
But as Lawfare executive editor Susan Hennessey wrote, the legal purview of perjury is incredibly narrow, and Barr had most likely worded his response in a way that would avoid such a charge.
Regarding a past instance in which a Trump administration figure was accused of perjury, Lawfare contributor Helen Klein Murillo wrote:
Legally, Barr is almost certainly in the clear on a perjury charge: It appears that his “I don’t know” response to Senator Van Hollen could fall under the definition of an unresponsive answer. But politically, the fallout for what appears to be an intentionally misleading statement is already intensifying the calls for Barr’s resignation or impeachment. Certainly, the release of the letter won’t make his testimony in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday any easier.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 30, 2019
Read Attorney General Bill Barr’s Prepared Statements Ahead of His Senate Judiciary Testimony

Attorney General Bill Barr’s prepared remarks were released on Tuesday evening, before his appearance in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee regarding his controversial treatment of the Mueller report. Adding to the controversy was a Tuesday-night leak in which Barr reportedly received a letter from Robert Mueller on March 27 in which the special counsel informed Barr that his four-page summary of the report “threaten[ed] to undermine” the investigation. (Barr had told the Senate on April 10 that he “[didn’t] know whether Bob Mueller supported my conclusion.”) You can read the prepared comments below — although the Tuesday-night leak is likely to push the hearing away from Barr’s provided statement.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 30, 2019
Watch Stephen Moore Try to Defend Racist Joke About Obama

As Republican senators begin to sour on the idea of nominating gold-standard enthusiast and prolific misogynist Stephen Moore to the board of the Federal Reserve, Trump’s nominee appeared on Firing Line With Margaret Hoover. If Moore is hoping to assure the president that he’s still the supply-sider for the job — the White House announced Monday that it is reviewing Moore’s columns for further moments of bigotry — the PBS interview certainly didn’t help his cause.
Hoover asked Moore about past comments that were neither appropriate at the time nor have aged well. In a 2000 appearance on C-SPAN, he stated that the rise of black female income was a negative influence on the family unit: “It’s not a good thing that black women are making more than black men today. In fact, the male needs to be the breadwinner of the family, and one of the reasons I think you’ve seen the decline of the family, not just in the black community, but also it’s happening now in the white community as well, is because women are more economically self-sufficient. So, I would like to see an increase in black earnings because black men have not closed the gap as much as black women have.” Moore reworded that position on Tuesday:
Moore also provided some clarity about an extremely questionable joke he made in a speech on health care given shortly after the election of Donald Trump: “By the way, did you see, there’s that great cartoon going along? A New York Times headline: ‘First Thing Donald Trump Does As President Is Kick a Black Family Out of Public Housing,’ and it has Obama leaving the White House. I mean, I just love that one. Just a great one.” Moore did his best to defend the quote, which was issued less than three years ago:
Moore added that “there should be a statute of limitations on saying stupid things,” claiming that “times have changed a lot” since he made the comments regarding female income in 2000. (Hoover then reminded Moore that he had made similar comments in 2014.) It appears that statute of limitations would need to be just seconds long to do Moore any good.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 30, 2019
Mueller Complained to Barr About His Spin on Russian Investigation

On the eve of Attorney General William Barr’s scheduled testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, a leak informed the world that the AG had received a previously undisclosed letter of complaint from special counsel Robert Mueller about the “summary” of his legal conclusions that Barr released back on March 24. The Washington Post had a look at the letter, and the most abundant scoop:
According to Justice Department sources, there was a follow-up phone conversation between Mueller and Barr in which the former special counsel didn’t directly blame the attorney general for the deception, except insofar as he made it possible by inadequate disclosure:
It sure sounds like Barr’s staff either leaked the letter themselves so that it wouldn’t come to light in the middle of a hearing, or leaped on it quickly in order to spin their boss’s spin on who misled whom about what.
Mueller’s letter, says the Post, argued for the early release of the introduction and executive summary of the report even as redactions to the full report were being negotiated. But Barr refused, which succeeded in maintaining his March 24 spin on the report for a while longer.
The New York Times notes that Barr’s staff blames Mueller for all the confusion over the obstruction-of-justice allegations against Trump:
That’s definitely not what the rest of the world concluded when the report finally went public:
Indeed, the picture was damning enough that it revived nearly dormant talk among Democrats of initiating impeachment proceedings at the apparent invitation of Mueller himself.
If nothing else, the disclosure adds some texture to the questions Barr will face tomorrow about his interactions with Mueller and his team and why he chose to characterize the report as he did, whitewashing it right up to the moment it was released. Perhaps it will even interfere with Senate Republican plans to indulge in hours of fun encouraging Barr to go down the rabbit hole of allegations that the FBI and Justice Department tried to rig the 2016 election for Hillary Clinton.
Barr may also face questioning by the House Judiciary Committee later this week if ground rules can be worked out. Any hopes he had of burying the Mueller investigation have certainly been dashed.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 30, 2019
The ‘Biden Bounce’ and Warren Surge Are Challenges for Bernie Sanders

The surge in polling results for Joe Biden after officially announcing his 2020 campaign represents a big surprise to those of us in the chattering class who thought his earlier poll numbers were a tad inflated, and/or thought his mishandling of communications with Anita Hill had stepped on his launch in a damaging manner. It looks like he’s doing fine at present.
As my colleague Eric Levitz observed, the new polls are particularly unwelcome news to two candidates with earlier booms in support who expected to cut into Biden’s support: Kamala Harris and Beto O’Rourke, who, as Levitz put it, have “fizzled faster than pop rocks.” In a new national poll from CNN, Biden has leapt 11 points and leads the field with 39 percent, while O’Rourke is at 6 percent and Harris has dropped all the way to a shocking 5 percent. Similarly, Quinnipiac shows Biden gaining nine points since its last survey, placing him at 38 percent, with Harris staying even at 8 percent and O’Rourke dropping from 12 percent to a mere 5 percent. Morning Consult’s weekly tracking poll gives Biden a six-point boost to 36 percent among likely voters, with Harris and O’Rourke now fifth and sixth, respectively, and in the mid-single digits. Pete Buttigieg is still doing pretty well with 7 percent in the CNN survey, 10 percent at Q-Pac, and 8 percent at Morning Consult. And Elizabeth Warren is suddenly in third place in the CNN and Morning Consult polls and in second place per Quinnipiac.
Aside from Harris and O’Rourke, the candidate who should be most alarmed by these and other findings is Bernie Sanders. Biden and Sanders were often viewed as co-front-runners; now Biden’s opening up a substantial lead on him in national polls. Even worse, a new Boston Globe/Suffolk poll of New Hampshire shows Biden leading Sanders there 20/12, with Mayor Pete tied with Bernie in second place. New Hampshire was generally assumed to be Sanders Country, in no small part because he trounced Hillary Clinton there (by a 60/38 margin) in 2016. It’s as close to a “must-win” state for Sanders as you could identify.
Beyond the numbers, the dynamics of this still-very-early race could be changing in dangerous ways for Sanders. The constant pounding Biden received over his past positions and inappropriate touching of women in the weeks before he joined the contest called into question his positioning as a consensus or “unity” candidate who might either overwhelm the field or gain strength late in the contest if no one else emerged as a star. Now Biden seems to have gotten some of that mojo back, which could paint Sanders into a factional corner as the candidate of progressive young voters but not much of anyone else. It has been an important token of Biden’s party-unifying potential that he’s consistently been (according to Morning Consult) the top second choice of Sanders supporters. This may well help explain why Sanders is very quickly differentiating his record on certain hot-button issues from that of the former veep, as CNN reports:
Aside from drawing attention to his own positions that were and are popular among progressives, Sanders is trying to depict Biden as the candidate of the centrist Democrats whose power in the party has steadily declined after Hillary Clinton’s shocking 2016 loss to Trump.
But Warren’s upward movement in the polls should be equally troubling to Sanders, since she entered the contest as the primary challenger to her Vermont colleague for the mantle of progressive, anti-corporate champion. For a while, it looked like the puzzling, likely sexist undervaluing of Warren in public opinion polls would doom her candidacy. And her support now is only rising gradually; she’s taking advantage of a fall-off in support for others, including the aforementioned Harris and O’Rourke. But whether it’s attributable to the grudging, party-wide respect she’s gained for her policy portfolio, or a reaction to her post-Mueller shift to support impeachment (which Bernie Sanders most definitely still opposes), she’s back in the thick of the contest. Given her heavy investment in early-state organizational efforts (especially in Iowa), she could be ready to make some serious waves, beginning with the upcoming candidate debates.
Obviously Bernie Sanders has some enduring assets that will keep his candidacy formidable through thick and thin: his own solid organization, his unequaled small-dollar fundraising prowess, and a core of supporters who won’t defect no matter what. His own coalition-building powers shouldn’t be underestimated, either: He’s the second choice of both Biden and Warren supporters in that Morning Consult tracking poll.
The next phase of the “invisible primary” preceding the actual voting events next year will involve some intensive repositioning and sharpening (if still civil) competition.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 30, 2019
Erik Prince Has Plans for Venezuela — If He Can Avoid Perjury Rap

A decade ago, the Iraqi government banned Blackwater Security from operating in the country after its mercenary fighters killed 17 civilians in Baghdad’s Nisour Square. That might dissuade some from meddling in conflicts overseas, but Blackwater founder Erik Prince is nothing if not committed to his profit margins. On Tuesday, Reuters reported that Prince — who no longer has a professional connection to Blackwater — has a new business plan. He’d like to send mercenary fighters to Venezuela, where they would help depose the country’s sitting president, Nicolás Maduro. Prince met recently with “influential” supporters of President Trump and “wealthy Venezuelan exiles” to pitch his plan to ship out as many as 5,000 mercenaries to aid opposition leader Juan Guaidó, according to Reuters.
A spokesman for Guaidó said that the aspiring president had not discussed security with Prince, and a source told Reuters that the White House would probably not support the plan. Representatives for Prince and for his firm, Frontier Resource Group, offered somewhat conflicting accounts of Prince’s intentions. His personal spokesman told Reuters that Prince “has no plans to operate or implement an operation in Venezuela,” but Reuters says that a spokeswoman for Frontier had confirmed Prince’s “interest” in Venezuelan security and added that Prince “does have a solution for Venezuela, just as he has a solution for many other places.”
If Prince, who is the brother of Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, can’t even get the White House onboard with his reputed plan, Venezuela might indeed be spared his “solution.” But while the White House has backed Guaidó’s bid to become Venezuela’s president, it doesn’t control the Venezuelan opposition; an anonymous Venezuelan told Reuters that while Prince’s plan likely wouldn’t work, “private contractors might prove useful, in the event Maduro’s government collapses, by providing security for a new administration in the aftermath.”
Venezuela isn’t the only country Prince has his sights on. Despite Blackwater’s bloody and inhumane tenure in Iraq, Prince recently insisted that mercenary forces could bring peace to Afghanistan. BuzzFeed News reported earlier this month that his Frontier Services Group is operating in Iraq, with the backing of Chinese investors. There may be no greater evidence of Washington’s culture of impunity than Prince. Much like the architects of the war in Iraq, he suffered no meaningful consequences for unleashing violent havoc there. Thus, it’s no surprise that Prince is still profiteering off various conflicts.
Prince may once again test his ability to shirk consequences. Representative Adam Schiff told the Washington Post on Tuesday that the House Intelligence Committee would make a criminal referral to the Department of Justice over inconsistencies between Prince’s testimony before the committee and his actions as uncovered by special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation. Prince told the committee that his Seychelles meeting with Kirill Dmitriev, the head of the Russian Investment Fund, was a chance encounter. That doesn’t appear to be true. George Nader, the financier who helped arrange the meeting, told Mueller’s investigators that he had briefed Prince on Dmitriev, who was, according to the report, “looking to build a link with the incoming Trump administration.” After Prince booked a ticket to the Seychelles, Nader wrote to Dmitriev directly to tell him that he had arranged a meeting with a member of the Trump transition team, referring to Prince, who at the time served in a loose capacity as an adviser to Trump’s incoming government.
Though the House Intelligence Committee can make a criminal referral to the DOJ, the responsibility and authority to act lies with that department. It’s an open question whether the DOJ would actually consider prosecuting the brother of a Cabinet secretary — and in fact, the DOJ might not be able to prosecute Prince at all. Prince’s statements to the Mueller team might be protected by an agreement that they not be used against him, Schiff noted. That means Prince might get off free, again.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 30, 2019
Even Senate Republicans Are Starting to Want Less of Stephen Moore

A week after CNN unearthed a handful of misogynistic comments from old Stephen Moore columns, the economic analyst’s likely nomination to the Federal Reserve appears less certain than ever.
On Monday, the White House said it has undertaken a review of Moore’s columns, in which he has written that women should have no involvement in sports unless they’re attractive and argued for the repeal of child labor laws.
National Economic Council director Larry Kudlow told reporters that the Trump administration is still behind Moore. “He is going through the process of vetting, and we’ll see what happens in that process,” Kudlow said. “And hopefully we’ll go on to the Senate Banking Committee. There’s no change in our position.”
But some key Republicans in the Senate, which will vote to confirm Moore once he’s formally nominated, seem to be cooling to the man who wrote Trumponomics. “I’m not enthused about supporting him,” Republican senator Joni Ernst said this week. “Look at his writings! I’m not enthused. I’m a woman.”
Georgia senator Johnny Isakson, whom Moore attacked in a 2004 Senate race, wondered why Moore hadn’t reached out. “He hasn’t called me, he hasn’t asked my opinion,” Isakson told the Washington Examiner. “You would think that after he said some of the things he said in the past, he would’ve if he were really sincere about getting the job.”
Among the other Senate Republicans to voice concerns are Utah’s Mitt Romney, West Virginia’s Shelley Moore Capito, and Alabama’s Richard Shelby, who hinted at problems with Moore that go beyond his inflammatory columns. “Taxes, alimony, child support — questions about all this. It doesn’t help any,” Shelby said.
The Guardian last month reported on Moore’s trouble with these issues:
Moore, meanwhile, appeared on ABC’s This Week Sunday to apologize. “These articles you’re talking about were 17, 18 years ago. They were humor columns, but some of them weren’t funny, so I am apologetic,” he said.
On Tuesday, Moore went on CNBC and struck a more defiant tone. “I think I’m going to be on the Fed,” he said. “By the way, the president and the White House economics team’s totally behind me.”
Adam K. Raymond



Apr. 30, 2019
Trump Steps Up Petty Harassment of Asylum-Seeking Migrants

The harder line on asylum-seeking migrants the president signaled in firing DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen and other key immigration officials is taking shape. A new Trump memo to acting DHS Secretary Kevin McAleenan and Attorney General William Barr calls for an array of efforts to make life miserable for migrant applicants, as the New York Times reports:
That these steps represent petty harassment of migrants to impress Trump’s immigration-focused political base is pretty clear, notes the Washington Post:
The administration seems to be testing the tolerance of the federal judges for actions that generally usurp congressional authority over immigration policy, often under the rubric of Trump’s controversial “national emergency declaration” in March. As Politico notes, there’s a lot of improvisation going on:
It’s not clear how high the new fees will be, or whether there will be waivers available for the often-destitute migrants fleeing violence and extreme poverty. Prohibiting these people from seeking work while they are awaiting adjudication of their applications for asylum will also impose real-life hardships, particularly on dependent family members. And there’s no way the new deadlines for adjudication of petitions in immigration court are going to work without miscarriages of justice, as the Times observes:
Despite the deliberately enhanced pain and chaos the administration is encouraging, it’s not at all clear these tactics will reduce the migrant flow; last month 103,000 migrants crossed the southern border, the highest number in more than a decade. The one thing Trump has accomplished, though, is to self-fulfill his claims of a “border crisis.” As the latest ABC-Washington Post poll shows, the percentage of Democrats calling the situation a “crisis” has risen from 7 percent at the beginning of the year to 24 percent now, though 27 percent still say it’s “not a serious problem.” Self-identified independents are somewhat more likely be to alarmed by the border issue, but Republicas — 56 percent of whom say there’s a “crisis” — are still driving the trend.
So Trump will probably succeed in making immigration a major 2020 campaign issue, though his ability to do anything more than frighten Americans and inflict pain on those hoping to become Americans remains in serious doubt.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 30, 2019
Trump Claims He Can Ignore Subpoenas Because Congress Is Mean

Last night Donald Trump and his family filed a lawsuit to prohibit Deutsche Bank and Capital One from turning over his financial information to congressional investigators. The legal basis for the lawsuit, in layman’s terms, is as follows: Congress is mean and only wants the information because it hates Trump. Or, to quote the only-slightly-more-sophisticated language of the lawsuit, “The subpoenas were issued to harass President Donald J. Trump, to rummage through every aspect of his personal finances, his businesses and the private information of the president and his family, and to ferret about for any material that might be used to cause him political damage. No grounds exist to establish any purpose other than a political one.”
This same argument runs nearly all of Trump’s refusals to abide congressional subpoenas. “These aren’t, like, impartial people,” the president declared of Congress. “The Democrats are trying to win 2020.”
The first thing to understand about this legal theory is that it is not a legal theory. Congress is a coequal branch of government which has a legal right to conduct investigations, including of the Executive branch and its officials. There is a legal gray zone around “executive privilege,” which describes the right of officials in the Executive branch to have some confidentiality around their internal discussions.
But Trump is not articulating a theory of executive privilege here. Nor would such a privilege cover a president’s right to maintain a business empire that accepts payments that may or may not be bribes disguised as legitimate reimbursements in complete secrecy from Congress and the public.
Essentially Trump’s argument is that congressional oversight is simply “politics” and, therefore, somehow null and void. Trump’s Deutsche Bank lawsuit has a passage that could have been lifted from an op-ed written by a sophomore member of the College Republicans. It quotes Nancy Pelosi promising “checks and balances to the Trump administration,” then asserts she was “not referring to legislation.” It proceeds to quote a series of journalists describing Congress’s investigations as being unpleasant for Trump:
The fact that journalists are describing congressional oversight as being difficult for Trump does not mean this was Congress’s sole intent. In any case, Congress’s dislike for Trump does not nullify its legal rights.
The American system of government of course is not predicated on different branches of government wanting to help each other out. Checks and balances assumes political competition. The system is designed to channel political rivalry into a productive synthesis. Of course Democrats are “trying to win.” So is Trump!
Trump’s notion that he can ignore legal obligations from anybody who isn’t “like, impartial” is especially comic. Trump has spent his presidency trampling on the the entire concept of neutral authority. His wild attacks on political norms have polarized every figure, requiring them either to submit to his demands or be identified as an enemy. Overtly fair-minded figures like Robert Mueller, or even friendly ones like Jeff Sessions, have been the target of Trump’s wrath simply for having the temerity to operate outside his personal control. The premise that he would accept “impartial” congressional oversight is a joke.
His refusal to abide oversight on the grounds that Congress is biased is so amateurish, legal experts are struggling to come up with ways to describe it. “This isn’t a close legal question,” Stanford law professor David Alan Sklansky tells the Washington Post, calling it “frivolous argument, even if it’s true.”
Trump’s opposition to congressional oversight appears to be an extension of his business strategy of threatening counterparties with expensive, time-consuming lawsuits in order to shirk his obligations. It worked in business, because he could bully smaller contractors who couldn’t afford the legal bills of a protracted fight to obtain their promised payments. Congress doesn’t have that problem, but the courts might take long enough processing the “arguments” that Trump can keep his scandals bottled up until after the election.
Trump’s extreme litigiousness is a natural extension of his general lack of shame. Once you have forfeited any claim to seriousness, there’s not much reputational cost in associating yourself with ridiculous legal assertions. What the courts need to decide is whether the president of the United States can treat Congress like some sucker carpenter that Trump decided not to pay.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 30, 2019
Stacey Abrams Takes a Pass on a 2020 Senate Run

In a video announcement and a brief interview with the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, 2018 Georgia gubernatorial candidate and national political comet Stacey Abrams has decided not to run for the Senate in 2020 against incumbent Republican David Perdue.
She did not rule out a late entry into the 2020 presidential campaign, or any other future course of action.
Abrams made it clear that she just didn’t really want to be a senator, telling the AJC’s Greg Bluestein that “it’s not the role I want to play in the next phase.”
This decision didn’t surprise anyone who has paid attention to Abrams’s carefully developed long-term plans for her career. As New York’s Rebecca Traister explained last month in a profile of her, Abrams has always been focused on becoming governor of Georgia — and maybe, just maybe, president.
The odds are high, then, that she’ll seek a rematch with Republican Brian Kemp in 2022, unless she decides it’s not too late to enter the crowded 2020 presidential field or entertain offers to serve as someone’s running mate. Joe Biden’s backers circulated rumors of an early Biden-Abrams ticket earlier this year, until Abrams quashed the talk as premature. Aside from the excitement her gubernatorial candidacy created, Abrams’s impressive performance in delivering the Democratic response to Trump’s 2019 State of the Union address solidified her standing as a national star. And she’s only 45.
No matter what she does, Abrams is sure to keep focused on her signature issue of voting rights, which the Republican Party running her state and our nation will continue to infringe as a matter of reactionary principle and political self-interest. And she will continue to be a symbol of a new and different Democratic Party in the South, one built on changing demographics and progressive coalition-building.
Her absence from the Senate race opens the door to other Democrats, notably former Columbus mayor Teresa Tomlinson, who’s already formed an exploratory committee while making it clear she’d defer to an Abrams run. The arithmetic for a Democratic reconquest of the Senate in 2020 dictates a major effort in Georgia even without the party’s biggest star at the top of the ballot. Abrams’s 2018 performance means that a Senate win there next year may still be a reach, but it’s no longer a fantasy.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 30, 2019
The Case for Thinking Joe Biden Can’t Be Stopped

The Democratic Party has never been more reliant on the votes of nonwhites, feminists, millennials, and self-professed liberals — or more committed to equity in representation. It’s never been more progressive on criminal justice (marijuana legalization and reducing incarceration are now centrist positions on the left side of the aisle). Never in its modern history has Team Blue been less reliant on the finance industry’s cash, or more eager to defend consumers against the predations of concentrated capital. And it certainly hasn’t ever taken sexual harassment more seriously.
It has also never been more likely to nominate Joe Biden — a 76-year-old white guy who brags about his warm relations with segregationist senators, championed mandatory-minimum sentences for nonviolent drug offenders, voted for the war in Iraq, sided with credit-card companies in their conflicts with the working poor, gave approximately 5 million nonconsensual shoulder rubs during a five-decade-long spree, and undermined Anita Hill’s historic testimony on sexual harassment before the Senate — as its standard-bearer.
The fact that Biden is a living embodiment of all that “extremely online” Democrats wish to reject — combined with Uncle Joe’s perfect record of running abysmal, gaffe-laden presidential campaigns — led many pundits to deem him an irrelevance: All those polls showing the former vice-president with a comfortable lead over the field were merely reflections of name recognition and an Obama nostalgia that was sure to migrate to either Kamala Harris (the history-making, historically charismatic candidate of the cycle) or Beto O’Rourke (this year’s young, handsome blank screen on which to project all your audacious hopes for change).
But in the weeks after their launches, Harris and O’Rourke fizzled faster than pop rocks. Meanwhile, a weeklong national news story about how Joe Biden is a handsy old man who makes women uncomfortable failed to put a dent in the former vice-president’s support. Last Thursday, Biden finally made his candidacy official, and proceeded to post the largest first-day fundraising total of any candidate in the race. Now, the first polls featuring Biden as a declared candidate have been taken; and depending which one you believe, his lead has either grown significantly, or massively.
Morning Consult’s weekly tracking poll shows Biden’s support growing by 6 points to 36 percent since his announcement, leaving him 14 points ahead of his closest competitor, Vermont senator Bernie Sanders. CNN, meanwhile, has Biden gaining 11 points since Thursday. Now, per the network’s survey, Biden boasts the backing of 39 percent of Democratic voters, while Sanders commands a mere 15. And Quinnipiac University paints a similar picture: Its new survey puts Biden’s support at 38 percent, up from 29 percent at the end of March. (Notably, that poll actually has Elizabeth Warren in second at 12 percent.)
Further, viewed from certain angles, Biden’s position looks even stronger than these topline numbers suggest. For one thing, he’s by far the most popular second choice among supporters of other Democratic candidates, including backers of ideologically disparate figures like Bernie Sanders. For another, in both polls, Biden’s closest rivals are Sanders and Pete Buttigieg. To a significant contingent of Democratic donors and Establishment officials, neither the socialist independent nor the mayor of South Bend are suitable standard-bearers for Team Blue. If Harris and O’Rourke fail to catch fire, there’s a decent chance a flood of money and endorsements will flow Biden’s way.
It is profoundly early. The Iowa caucuses are nearly a year away. The debates haven’t even begun. And critically, in the early states — where candidates have actually been campaigning, and thus, pure name recognition plays a smaller role in polling — Biden’s advantage appears much less commanding. There’s plenty of time for Biden to cough up some fatal gaffe, or undermine the aura of electability that’s powering much of his support. Bernie Sanders’s fundraising remains extraordinary, and his following’s youth, energy, and passion could allow it to punch far above its apparent weight. If you squint, you can sort of see Elizabeth Warren inching up in the polls (and she continues to impress party activists in in-person settings). Right now, CNN has Harris’s nonwhite support at just 4 percent. That could mean she’s going nowhere. But it could also mean that once her name recognition grows — and she proves her “electability” with a strong showing in California — her support will soar as a large contingent of African-American voters line up behind her.
All this said, it just might be later than it looks. Donald Trump’s presidency has inspired a level of sustained public interest in politics and political media without precedent in the modern era. Around this time in 2015, 22 percent of voters told CNN they were “extremely enthusiastic” about voting in the next year’s presidential election; that figure is now 45 percent. In April 2015, the major cable networks weren’t scoring huge ratings wins by airing presidential town halls.
Biden’s current advantage should be taken with many grains of salt. But it shouldn’t be written off. He may not be the hero Democrats deserve, but he’s the one they want right now.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 30, 2019
Right-Wing Troll Jacob Wohl Allegedly Behind Fake Buttigieg Sexual-Assault Claim

A 19-year-old college student is accusing right-wing troll Jacob Wohl and lobbyist Jack Burkman of using his name and image to level a false sexual-assault accusation against Pete Buttigieg. The claim was published on Medium on Monday afternoon but has since been deleted.
In a Facebook post on Monday, Ferris State University student Hunter Kelly wrote that he was “approached by a political figure to come to DC to discuss political situations from the standpoint of a gay Republican.” He told The Advocate that he was flown to Washington, D.C., on Sunday night and picked up at the airport by Wohl and Burkman. During the ride to Burkman’s home, the two men discussed how they must stop Buttigieg. Kelly says he slept over at Burkman’s house, and when he woke up at 11 a.m., he learned they’d used him name to falsely accuse Buttigieg of assault.
Later, on Facebook, Kelly wrote, “I WAS NOT SEXUALLY ASSAULTED. It’s important for everyone to know that I was not sexually assaulted and would never falsely accuse anyone.” After Burkman tweeted a photo of Kelly and a statement he had signed, Kelly told The Advocate that he was forced to sign the document and take the picture. “I had no say in either. In the photo you can clearly see I had been crying,” he said.
Buttigieg told the Daily Beast that the accusation against him was fake. “It’s not going to throw us,” he said. “Politics can be ugly sometimes, but you have to face that when you’re in presidential politics.” The site reported that Kelly was not the only man Wohl and Burkman approached with the idea of accusing the South Bend mayor. One man, who provided an audio record of his meeting with Wohl, told the site that the duo wanted him to accuse Buttigieg “of engaging him sexually while he was too drunk to consent.”
He described their pitch to the The Daily Beast:
This would not be the first time Wohl has been accused of duping someone into being the face of sexual-assault allegations. Last fall, a woman told USA Today that Wohl “needed a credible female to put on the line” for false accusations against Robert Mueller. So he used hers.
Adam K. Raymond



Apr. 30, 2019
Rod Rosenstein Embodies the Republican Surrender to Trump

The most bizarre passage in Rod Rosenstein’s letter to President Trump resigning his post as deputy attorney general is praise for “the courtesy and humor you often display in our personal conversations.” It is not standard practice for the president to have personal conversations with the deputy attorney general at all, certainly not when that person is supervising an investigation into the president himself. And while we cannot know the substance of those personal conversations, we do know that Rosenstein was once so alarmed by Trump’s behavior that he discussed invoking the 25th Amendment to have him removed on account of mental unfitness.
Maybe Trump’s private conversations somehow contain the humor that is completely lacking in his public persona, which consist of boasts, lies, and belittling attacks. Trump’s public treatment of Rosenstein included tweeting an image of him behind bars along with other alleged traitors. That Trump, what a jokester.
Rosenstein’s status as a target of Trump’s rage, and his background as a career official, raised broad hopes that he would check the president’s authoritarian impulses. By all indications, he failed to live up to this heroic destiny. Rosenstein ended his career as a dutiful functionary, allowing Trump to trash the rule of law while claiming he had upheld it.
Rosenstein deserves to be judged by the forgiving standards of a man placed in an untenable situation and having no good options. Trump’s worldview is inimical to the concept of the rule of law. The president believes the Department of Justice can and must be placed at his personal disposal, and used to harass his enemies while giving himself and his friends impunity. Trump can no more grasp a Department of Justice that holds his views at arm length than he could abide the doorman at his hotels subjecting him to strip searches.
Rosenstein’s answer to this dilemma was to bend, and bend, and bend. When Trump demanded personal loyalty from the FBI director and fired him for failing to quash a probe into Trump’s campaign, Rosenstein dutifully wrote a letter supplying Trump with a phony pretext. When Trump fired Attorney General Jeff Sessions for the offense of following Department rules and recusing himself from an investigation into which he was massively conflicted, he remained loyal. When Trump installed a transparent hack in Matthew Whitaker, prompting more than 400 former DOJ officials to sign a public letter of protest, Rosenstein called the choice “superb.”
And then of course Rosenstein joined with Attorney General William Barr to impose their judgment that Robert Mueller’s investigation would not accuse the president of obstructing justice. One of Trump’s many acts of obstruction included instructing Corey Lewandowski, a private citizen, to order Sessions to violate Department procedure and take control of the investigation. As Ben Wittes notes, “If true and provable beyond a reasonable doubt, it is unlawful obstruction of justice.”
Barr, with Rosenstein’s imprimatur, deemed these and all of Trump’s other efforts to harm the investigation to be non-crimes. He did this despite the fact that Trump’s obstruction of justice successfully obstructed the probe – by dangling pardons to key witnesses, Roger Stone and Paul Manafort, thereby preventing Mueller from getting to the bottom of the campaign’s collusion with Russia. Barr and Rosenstein made the comically backward argument that because Trump prevented Mueller from proving criminal collusion, there was no underlying crime, therefore his efforts to halt the probe must go unpunished.
Before his firing, Comey confided his misgivings about Rosenstein. “Rod is a survivor,” he said. And you don’t get to survive that long across administrations without making compromises. “So I have concerns.” This turned out to be a perfect epitaph for Rosenstein’s tenure.
When Trump was poised to fire Rosenstein last fall, Rosenstein pleaded for his job. “I give the investigation credibility,” he said, according to the Washington Post, “I can land the plane.” Trump has a gift for homing in on this kind of weakness, and surrounding himself with morally compromised individuals who will do his bidding. Rosenstein’s desperation to avoid the ignominy of a firing and the torrent of abuse that always followed it – “I don’t want to go out with a tweet,” he said, according to the Post – made him suitably pathetic for Trump’s purposes.
In a farewell speech several days ago, Rosenstein sycophantically quoted his boss: “As President Trump pointed out, ‘we govern ourselves in accordance with the rule of law rather [than] … the whims of an elite few.’” It was perhaps his most overt gesture of submission. Here Rosenstein credited a man he knows perfectly well has contempt for the rule of law with cherishing the principle he has relentlessly undermined, a task at which Rosenstein ultimately aided him. He might as well have quoted Trump proclaiming the importance of truth, chastity and frugality.
We can extend Rosenstein enough credit to assume things did not follow his fondest hopes. He surely did not want the FBI Director and Attorney general to be fired for doing their jobs properly, nor to be publicly belittled by the president. Instead he seems to have convinced himself that the need for normalcy, or the appearance of it, transcended everything else. After principled resignation seemed unthinkable, every new compromise simply kept the plane on track for its landing.
It turns out most of the Republicans in the bureaucracy operate along the same principles as the ones running for office. Trump’s manifest unfitness for office and disdain for democratic norms begin as a shock. Gradually, though, they recede into the background, and take their place as fixed features of the landscape around which everything else must be arranged. That is how Mitch McConnell and Paul Ryan have worked around and ultimately for a figure they greeted with disgust. And that ultimately is how Rosenstein, too, served Trump.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 29, 2019
Suicide Rates Are Going Up. Raising the Minimum Wage Might Help Bring Them Down.

More Americans are dying by suicide than at any other point in the last half-century, the Centers for Disease Control reported in 2018. The national suicide rate increased by 33 percent from 1999 to 2017, which contributed to an average decline in American life expectancy. Suicide is now a public-health crisis, and a complex one, too; there’s no one-size-fits-all prevention strategy suitable for all at-risk people. Therapy, medication, and legislation that restricts public access to firearms have been shown to be effective means of reducing rates of death from suicide. But a new working paper from researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, suggests that there may another way to achieve a modest decline in deaths from suicide. Raising the minimum wage doesn’t just fulfill a key demand of the labor movement, or lift workers out of poverty, or redistribute some corporate profits from the CEOs at the top to the workers who keep their businesses afloat. Higher wages can also save lives.
Berkeley researchers found that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage “dropped suicides among men and women without college degrees aged 18 to 64 by 3.6 percent.” Increasing the Earned Income Tax Credit, which principally benefits low-and-middle-income households with children, by 10 percent also reduced deaths by suicide by 5.5 percent in the same demographic. Policy that increases “both the minimum wage and the EITC by 10 percent would likely prevent a combined total of around 1,230 suicides each year,” researchers concluded.
Previous research had already confirmed links between economic precarity and suicide rates. As CityLab reported at the time, a 2015 study in the Journal of Public Health found that deaths by suicide spurred by evictions and foreclosures doubled between 2005 and 2010, a period of time that spans the recession of 2008. Rising mortality rates among midlife, non-Hispanic whites without college degrees are driven in part by deaths by suicide, as Princeton University economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton documented in a pair of papers on rising rates of “deaths of despair” — deaths through drug overdose or suicide. The Berkeley study did not find that higher minimum wages and EITC benefits reduced rates of death by drug overdose, and researchers did not restrict their work to non-Hispanic whites. Instead, they intervened in an on-going debate about deaths of despair as a category, and their conclusion adds new dimension to an emerging body of work that examines the links between poverty and public-health crises.
Non-Hispanic whites are less likely to live in poverty compared to other racial demographics, and they aren’t the only group to experience an increase in deaths by suicide. In fact, the CDC’s 2018 report found that suicide rates had increased in all demographics. The psychological burdens of poverty are well known and can be especially damaging to children and adolescents. Adults, too, can experience cognitive costs associated with economic deprivation, both in the form of impaired decision-making and in disproportionately high rates of self-reported depression in individuals living under the federal poverty threshold.
The conclusion of the Berkeley study seems almost intuitive. If poverty contributes to depression, and to rates of death by suicide, then poverty-reduction measures may also be suicide-prevention measures. As Matthew Desmond outlined recently in the New York Times, higher minimum wages had already been tentatively linked to declines in smoking and low-weight births and an increased ability to pay basic medical expenses. “Poverty can be unrelenting, shame-inducing and exhausting. When people live so close to the bone, a small setback can quickly spiral into a major trauma,” Desmond wrote. A foreclosure, a medical bill, a car that can’t be fixed; poverty opens you up in a hundred different ways and leaves you vulnerable to a predatory world. There’s only so much trauma a human being can endure before they stop feeling human at all.
A 10 percent raise is such a small thing, yet it still has so many enemies. Republican lawmakers tend to oppose it, as do many corporations. In a recent, major exception to that rule, McDonald’s announced this year that it will no longer oppose minimum-wage hikes. That decision could save lives, but only because workers forced the matter. The Fight for 15 movement is also a fight for human life.
If you’re considering thoughts of self-harm, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255.
Sarah Jones







Apr. 29, 2019
Democrats Don’t Have to Choose Between Base and Swing Voters

There is no area of argument in politics hoarier than the one that revolves around targeting “base” or “swing” voters — or to put it another way, the choice between mobilizing voters who already agree with you or persuading voters who don’t but might.
There’s obviously some ideological freight carried by the argument, since by definition base voters are going to be more comfortable with positions and messages most distinct from that of the opposition, while swing voters tend to listen to both sides. And so, among Democrats, base versus swing has long been a bone of contention between centrists and progressives.
This argument used to be one in which centrists usually had the upper hand because there were so very many swing voters, and also because winning a swing voter had the dual effect of gaining Democrats a vote while taking one away from Republicans. But with the rapid shrinkage of swing voting amid growing partisan polarization, and the heavy investment of Republicans in obstructing full voting opportunities for young people and minorities, the shoe is more often on the other foot now, with base mobilization becoming more essential and swing-voter persuasion being more difficult. It should still be possible for campaigns to do both. But on occasion representatives of the base view appeals to swing voters as something of a betrayal.
That’s how New York Times columnist Charles Blow appears to feel about appeals to white working-class voters:
Then Blow goes off:
Blow goes on to quote from a 2017 sociological study concluding that only 18.6 percent of 2016 voters were from the white working class. But that study develops its own, narrow definition of “working class” based on specific occupations, which may be defensible as a matter of sociology but does not describe the much larger universe (most commonly defined as non-college-educated) of voters actual politicians are actually targeting. As Ruy Teixeira reports from a 2018 study of this larger universe, it represented 44 percent of the 2016 electorate.
But even if I think his numbers are way off, I can understand Blow’s frustration with those exclusively preoccupied with swing voters who don’t share the party’s basic values. As a southern Democrat, I was always bothered that the members of the party’s most important electoral bloc, African-Americans, were expected perpetually to vote for white candidates, including those who self-identified as conservatives, with no expectation of white-voter reciprocity. As white southern voters increasingly moved into the GOP ranks, this particular swing-voter strategy became morally if not politically obtuse.
Is that what’s going on with the national Democratic Party now? And is that why Joe Biden is a viable candidate? Is Paul Waldman right in this pungent tweet:
There’s enough truth in that to make me chuckle, but on the other hand, the only reason Joe Biden is the 2020 front-runner is that he’s also the single-most-popular candidate among minority voters. A March 28 Quinnipiac poll of Democrats with detailed cross-tabs showed Biden supported by 44 percent of African-Americans (and just 29 percent of white voters), with Bernie Sanders a distant second at 17 percent.
More generally, it’s a rare and foolish Democrat who argues for targeting all white working-class voters; there’s a large segment lost for the foreseeable future thanks to reactionary racial, cultural, and even economic views, and a smaller but still significant segment that’s open to the same Democratic messages as most base voters. We are mostly, after all, talking about white working-class voters who supported Barack Obama in 2008 or 2012 — a candidate deeply beloved among base Democrats (and perhaps the main reason so many base Democrats currently like Joe Biden).
What will fail to bring these voters back, of course, is a Democratic Party that ignores them, or that treats them as inherently reactionary, or that goes out of its way to tell them they don’t matter politically. Charles Blow comes pretty close to arguing for precisely those tokens of disrespect:
No one that I’m aware of is in favor of an “inordinate” focus on white working-class voters, but in the end a vote is a vote, and an a priori rejection of broad demographic categories is a good way to make sure you don’t get enough of them.
Without question, the base will determine the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination, and no matter how much talk about electability takes place, it’s extremely unlikely anyone can win without explaining to “loyal constituencies” what’s in it for them, specifically. But treating the defeat of Donald Trump as a second-order consideration that’s less important than rewarding the steadiest of base voters is an approach that runs a high risk of forfeiting these very voters’ interests.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 29, 2019
A Brief Guide to the Joe Biden–Anita Hill Controversy

Hours after Joe Biden made his presidential run official last Thursday, Anita Hill’s name was back in the news. Earlier this month, with an eye toward getting into the race, Biden called Hill to “express his regret” for her treatment during the Clarence Thomas Supreme Court confirmation hearings, the New York Times reported.
Hill — who accused the judge of sexual harassment and was mocked, jeered, and dismissed by the Senate Judiciary Committee, which Biden chaired — “declined to characterize [Biden’s] words to her as an apology,” according to the Times. She also said she could not support his candidacy.
Nearly three decades after Hill’s blockbuster testimony, it’s clear that Biden’s role in it is still an issue. For those whose memory of the fall of 1991 is hazy (or who weren’t even born yet), here’s a brief refresher on what happened.
She almost didn’t. Thomas’s confirmation hearings were largely unremarkable until NPR’s Nina Totenberg reported that Hill, then a law professor at the University of Oklahoma, had told the FBI that Thomas sexually harassed her. An uproar followed, and Hill was called to testify.
In front of the all-male, all-white Senate Judiciary Committee, Hill claimed that Thomas sexually harassed her in the early ’80s when they worked together at the Education Department and the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. She said he repeatedly tried to get her to go on dates with him and made many inappropriate sexual remarks.
“He talked about pornographic materials depicting individuals with large penises or large breasts, involved in various sex acts,” she said. “On several occasions, Thomas told me graphically of his own sexual prowess.” In another incident, Hill said Thomas cracked a joke to her about finding a “pubic hair on my Coke.”
In his own testimony, Thomas would deny everything Hill said: “From my standpoint, as a black American, as far as I’m concerned, it is a high-tech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves, to do for themselves, to have different ideas.”
As chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee at the time, it fell on Biden to preside over the hearings. Critics of his performance tend to hone in on three things.
First, he did little to stop members of the committee from attacking Hill. The Republicans were the most relentless. Arlen Specter asked her why she didn’t report the behavior to HR and said that discussing “large breasts” at work was common. Howell Heflin asked if she was a “scorned woman” and if she had “militant attitude relative to the area of civil rights” or a “martyr complex.” Charles Grassley accused her of lifting the pubic hair story from The Exorcist.
Second, Biden failed to call additional witnesses who could have corroborated Hill’s testimony. One of those women, Angela Wright Shannon, told Roll Call in 2016 that it was probably a good thing that she didn’t testify. “I don’t think I could have maintained the grace and dignity of Anita Hill,” she said. Hill, in 2014, said Biden declining to put the other witnesses in front of the committee was “a disservice to me” and “a disservice more importantly, to the public,” as allowing those women to testify would have “helped the public to understand sexual harassment. He failed to do that.”
Lastly, Biden’s critics say that his own questioning of Hill was unfair, blaming him for “setting an accusing, skeptical tone and losing control,” the Washington Post reports. Charles Ogletree, a Harvard law professor and Hill’s attorney at the time, told Politico he still blames Biden for mishandling the hearing:
Whether or not Biden had offered an adequate apology became a contentious issue as he launched his 2020 campaign. Over the years, Biden tiptoed up to an apology, but hadn’t fully committed. Hill’s family even jokes about it, she told Elle last year. “It’s become sort of a running joke in the household when someone rings the doorbell and we’re not expecting company,” she said. “‘Oh,’ we say, ‘is that Joe Biden coming to apologize?’”
Even in recent months, Biden downplayed his role in what happened to her. “To this day, I regret I couldn’t give her the kind of hearing she deserved,” Biden said earlier this year. “I wish I could have done something.”
Though Biden reached out to Hill in recent weeks, she told the Times the call left her unsatisfied. “I cannot be satisfied by simply saying, ‘I’m sorry for what happened to you,’” she said. “I will be satisfied when I know there is real change and real accountability and real purpose.”
Friday on The View, Joy Behar pushed Biden to personally apologize for his own role in the hearings. He pushed back. “If you go back and look at what I said and didn’t say, I don’t think I treated her badly,” he said.
In an interview with Good Morning America, which airs in full on Tuesday, Biden said he takes “responsibility” for Hill’s treatment during the hearing, and suggested he’s already apologized.
“I believed her from the very beginning, but I was chairman. She did not get a fair hearing. She did not get treated well. That’s my responsibility,” Biden told GMA. “As the committee chairman, I take responsibility that she did not get treated well. I take responsibility for that.”
“I apologized for it,” Biden continued. “I apologize again because, look, here’s the deal. She just did not get treated fair across the board. The system did not work.”
One possible reason why Biden was hesitant to say he’s sorry? It seems the idea was that if he started, he wouldn’t ever be able to stop.
So far, the 2020 Democratic primary has been fairly positive. Biden’s entrance into the race might change that.
Over the weekend, two of his many competitors commented on the Hill story. Senator Amy Klobuchar said on Meet the Press that Hill’s testimony and the subsequent controversy over how she was treated “motivated me to get involved in politics.” She didn’t say much about Biden’s role other than noting that he will have to “continue to address this issue” over the course of the campaign.
Massachusetts congressman Seth Moulton, a new entrant into the race, was more direct in his criticism of Biden. “I think she was treated terribly,” he said of Hill Sunday, according to Politico. “Joe Biden is a mentor and a friend of mine; he’s a great American. Everybody makes mistakes — I do think that was a mistake, though, and I do think he should apologize.”
This post was updated to include Biden’s remarks to Good Morning America.
Adam K. Raymond



Apr. 29, 2019
Trump’s Reelection Prospects 18 Months Out

This week, we’ll be 18 months away from the 2020 general election. The Democratic field is probably almost complete (Montana governor Steve Bullock could jump in after the adjournment of his state’s legislature this week, and former Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams hasn’t ruled out an even-later announcement of candidacy). Yes, a lot of strange and powerful things could happen in a year and a half, but it’s not too early to get straight a number of fundamental factors affecting Donald Trump’s reelection prospects, which in turn could have a major impact on how Democrats perceive their own decision on selecting an opponent for the 45th president.
As you can imagine, there’s no ironclad formula for determining these things (despite the occasional glib and inaccurate assertions that incumbents always win or that “it’s the economy, stupid”), particularly with respect to an outlandish president like Trump. But there are factors that will definitely have a bearing on the odds that he’ll have a second inaugural and can again radically exaggerate attendance.
A statistic we’ll hear often between now and November 2020 is that four of the five presidents running for reelection after 1980 won — or alternatively, that eight of the 11 running since the end of World War II won. Some gabbers may even stack the deck a bit more by excluding Gerald Ford from the calculation, since he was never elected president or vice-president before his narrow 1976 loss. And there are those who would distinguish Ford and Jimmy Carter from any meaningful precedents because they had to overcome powerful intraparty primary challenges unlike anything Donald Trump is likely to face in 2020.
And there’s still another argument for excluding Carter, as noted by Musa al-Gharbi in predicting a Trump win in 2020:
In any event there are real advantages any incumbent president undoubtedly possesses:
Name recognition and the ability to command attention are assets that don’t matter quite so much at the end of a high-profile presidential general election, and it’s hard to envision Trump ever being the natural choice of the risk-averse. But “control over the instruments of government” does involve the ability to throw a surprise or two into the mix (e.g., Barack Obama’s DACA directive in June 2012, which was not only quite popular but preempted a Romney move in the same direction that might have mitigated his harsh anti-immigrant image).
So Trump probably should be credited with a modest thumb on the scales simply for being in the White House already.
While most political scientists reject the idea that economic conditions are the only thing that matters in presidential elections involving an incumbent, virtually all predictive models do take the economy into account. And if there’s been a recent revision of expectations in Trump’s favor in recent weeks in the chattering classes generally, it’s because earlier signs of a possible near-term economic slowdown now appear to be hiccups. Initial estimates that first-quarter 2019 GDP growth came in at 3.2 percent (significantly higher than most economists’ expectations) struck fear into the hearts of many Democrats.
But economic indicators in the year before a presidential election aren’t usually a very reliable guide to how voters will feel when they head to the polls. One well-reputed model, developed by Emory University’s Alan Abramowitz, uses second-quarter GDP growth in the election year as the primary economic variable. Even economists who weren’t surprised by the early-2019 numbers (usually attributed to the effects of the 2017 tax legislation) aren’t predicting they’ll continue all the way into 2020. So what may matter more than any particular numbers right now is a general climate in which steady growth, low inflation, and perhaps a touch of partisan politics convince the Federal Reserve Board to continue expansionary monetary policies, keeping the economy in the pink as the 2020 election grows nigh (it’s frequently assumed that short of a catastrophe, very late economic developments don’t matter anymore than very early ones — hence Abramowitz’s second-quarter focus).
As a separate matter, however, strong economic indicators in 2019 could complicate Democratic messaging in the early phases of the presidential election cycle. Democrats and their presidential candidates may, accordingly, focus less on macroeconomic conditions than on arguments about growing wealth being poorly distributed, which is what a majority of Americans appear to believe even as they perceive economic conditions as relatively rosy.
It’s generally agreed that presidential job-approval ratings are the single most reliable indicator of any POTUS’s reelection prospects, if only because it reflects so many other factors, such as economic conditions, international developments, and the net effect of partisan pressures. Trump’s approval ratings 18 months out are not that different from those of a number of predecessors. The most recent monthly Gallup rating (from early April) has Trump at 45 percent, identical to Ronald Reagan’s number at this juncture in 1983; one point above Barack Obama’s 44 percent in 2011; and one point below Gerald Ford’s 46 percent in 1975. Reagan eventually won 49 states in 1984, Obama won by just under four points in 2012, and Ford lost very narrowly in 1976.
What separates Trump from all of these presidents, and indeed from all presidents, is the remarkable stability of his job-approval numbers; he’s had the least variation of any post–World War II president. His current Gallup rating is at his absolute peak, which he briefly achieved two other times in his presidency but could never sustain. Reagan’s Gallup approval rating rose from 45 percent 18 months out to 53 percent six months later, then 55 percent eight months later. Obama’s rose from 44 percent 18 months out to 52 percent on Election Eve. While anything’s possible, there’s no particular reason to think Trump is capable of a similar ascent. And for that matter, Gallup’s latest relatively high job-approval number for Trump could be an outlier on the high side: His average approval rating at Real Clear Politics is 43.1 percent, and at FiveThirtyEight, 41.3 percent. The GOP’s hope that the “exoneration” of Trump they falsely attributed to the Mueller report would finally get POTUS over the hump into something like positive job-approval territory did not turn out to be realistic at all.
Whether it’s a product of Trump’s singular personality or partisan polarization, his inflexible approval ratings do not bode well for an election-year surge, barring some very large external event or a very poor decision by Democrats in nominating an opponent.
Midterm elections are for the most part referenda on the party controlling the White House. Presidential elections involving an incumbent are partially   that as well, but there is a significant comparative element, too, that is not as important in midterms.
The possibility that Trump could be reelected despite bad job-approval ratings is best illustrated by the still-shocking fact that he won in 2016 despite a horrendous Election Eve Gallup favorability ratio of 36/61. His opponent’s ratio of 47/52 was bad enough to enable him to win with an inside straight in the Electoral College despite losing the popular vote by more than two points. Since his entire 2020 strategy is again to drive down his opponent’s popularity with savagely negative attacks while solidifying his own base, Trump’s own popularity could again be less crucial than might otherwise be the case.
Despite an ever-increasing Democratic preoccupation with the “electability” of their 2020 prospects, it’s very difficult at this juncture to predict whether 2016 could repeat itself. Early trial heats show Trump mostly trailing the best-known Democrats, Biden and Sanders, and mostly leading the lesser-known aspirants. But early presidential trial heat polls do not have a very good record of predictive value. After a Democratic nominee is chosen such polls really will begin to be worth following; despite all the postelection caterwauling about inaccurate polls, they weren’t at all far off in 2016, as Nate Silver observed in a postmortem:
After what happened in 2016, however, it’s a good guess that more extensive polling will be conducted in states that are competitive but not assumed to be battlegrounds, like the Rust Belt states that fell to Trump with very little warning.
A big imponderable is the question of whether the various Democratic candidates truly vary in electability, or if instead partisanship will drive the election — i.e., in the end, any Democrat will be a “generic” Democrat. Surely the specific identity of the nominee, and for that matter campaign developments like debates, will matter at least at the margins, where close elections are often won and lost. And it may also matter whether the nominee is or isn’t especially vulnerable to GOP campaign attack lines aimed at painting the Democrat as an “extremist,” or to put it another way, as risky a proposition as a second term for Trump.
Reporters will pay a lot of attention to fundraising numbers heading toward 2020. But while these may matter in primaries, barring massive advantages by one side or the other, money isn’t usually a decisive factor in presidential general elections, in part because name identification isn’t an issue and in part because there’s so much unpaid media available. How the money is spent could be important, but it’s a bit too early to make comparative conclusions about any of that.
Comparative turnout will matter a lot, and both parties are expected to focus more than ever on driving base voters to the polls, both via mechanical outreach efforts and inflammatory rhetoric. Generally speaking, presidential elections bring out pro-Democratic elements of the electorate more than midterms, though high 2018 turnout from those very elements could mean Democrats shouldn’t count on that much of a boost in 2020. Long-term demographic trends universally assumed to favor Democrats will have marginally affected the shape of the electorate since 2016, which is one of those things that could make a difference in another razor-close Electoral College contest.
There is one factor that is difficult to measure but undoubtedly real that could help get Democrats across the line in 2020: Trump will not ambush them again. It’s unclear how many should-have-been Clinton voters in 2016 didn’t bother to vote, went third-party, or even cast a protest vote for Trump on the assumption that HRC was certain to win. But anecdotally at least, they existed, and that very likely won’t happen again. Similarly, the 2020 Democratic candidate, whoever it is, will almost certainly avoid the underinvestment in what turned out to be crucial battlegrounds that the Clinton campaign mistakenly made.
Last but not least, there’s the little matter of some election-altering set of external events. There’s no way to know if some sudden international development involving military conflict, or some domestic terrorist incident, will happen between now and November 2020 and, in that event, whether Trump will handle it in a way that helps or hurts him politically. Right now, Democrats and neutral observers alike are engaged in an intense argument about whether moving toward impeachment of Trump would help crystallize public understanding of his corrupt and even criminal character, or would distract voters from more compelling anti-Trump arguments. How that argument is resolved could be one of the greatest wild cards for 2020.
So adding all this up, how do Trump’s reelection prospects look? I still think he’s an underdog — albeit a menacing, loudly growling underdog — for reelection given his perpetually poor approval ratings; the likelihood that Democrats’ larger base will be exceptionally motivated to turn him out of office lest the existential threat of a second Trump term materialize; and his inability to control some of his worst impulses, even when it’s politically imperative.
But a Trump defeat won’t happen automatically, and we already know that precedent-shattering bad behavior by the incumbent is so fundamental to his identity that it probably won’t matter at all, unless a critical mass of voters just get weary of the whole circus — in which case, he’s toast.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 29, 2019
PewDiePie Calls on Fans to End Namesake Meme

Over the weekend, YouTuber PewDiePie called on his fans to stop perpetuating the “subscribe to PewDiePie” meme, one that grew from YouTube infighting to international infamy after it was invoked by the Christchurch shooter on his livestream earlier this year.
“”I think it’s time to end the ‘subscribe to PewDiePie’ movement, or meme,” he told his fans. The phrase rose in prominence as the YouTube account of Indian production company T-Series seemed primed to overtake PewDiePie as the most-subscribed channel. In response, fans sought to keep PewDiePie at the top of the list by doing things like holding up banners during the Super Bowl or hacking printers to display the message.
T-Series, despite the countereffort, is now comfortably in the top spot. The YouTuber, whose real name is Felix Kjellberg, told fans that he expected the running gag to last “a couple of days or maybe a week,” and called the global response “incredibly humbling.”
But, he added, “When you have 90 million people riled up about something, you’re bound to get a few degenerates.” Prior to the Christchurch shooting, the message had also been written on a World War II memorial in New York. Following Christchurch, Kjellberg issued a short statement disavowing the shooter and his actions, but is just now expanding on his thoughts. “I didn’t want to make it about me,” he told viewers. “It’s clear to me now the ‘subscribe to PewDiePie’ movement should’ve ended then.”
What happens next remains to be seen. History has shown that memes co-opted by white supremacists and web Nazis can’t exactly be killed — just ask Matt Furie, creator of Pepe the Frog. Celebrities have similarly become unwilling fan objects of that crowd as well — as Taylor Swift well knows. At the very least, Kjellberg’s rejection of the meme preemptively shuts down anyone who would justify its continued use by claiming “it’s about positivity” or “it’s in good fun.” PewDiePie adherents can’t believably claim to act in the name of a leader who has explicitly rejected their call to action. “Subscribe to PewDiePie” might’ve been a simple joke at one point, but even as Kjellberg admits, it’s not anymore. Sometimes old memes must die so new memes can live.
Brian Feldman



Apr. 29, 2019
Years of Low Pay Helped Spark the Teacher Strike Wave

From a distance, last year’s RedforEd teacher walkouts may have seemed like a spontaneous expression of frustration or even desperation. In reality, though, the economic circumstances behind high-profile labor actions in West Virginia, Kentucky, Oklahoma, and elsewhere had been building for years, and so had the organizing efforts that helped bring those walkouts to life. The National Education Association’s latest edition of its annual Rankings & Estimates report, released on Monday morning, adds context to the origins of the RedforEd movement and affirms the complaints of protesting teachers. As teachers walked into their classrooms for the start of the 2017–18 academic year, they could expect to be paid far less than college graduates in other professional fields.
The NEA, which represents around 3 million members, found that American public-school teachers made an average salary of $60,477. But salaries vary from state to state and from school district to school district. Classroom teachers in New York made $84,227 on average; in Oklahoma, a walkout state, that same figure plummeted to $46,300. Even considering differences in living costs, Oklahoma’s average salary may not be a living wage for teachers, especially if they have families to support. Circumstances were even less auspicious for teachers just starting out in the profession. The NEA report found that 60 percent of educators worked in school districts that pay new teachers at least $40,000, but 288 school districts paid a starting salary of less than $30,000 a year. Nationally, the average starting salary for a teacher with a bachelor’s degree was $39,249. On paper, that’s a small increase from last year’s average for that category — $38,701. But factoring in inflation, salaries for starting teachers actually declined 2.91 percent over the last decade. (Monday’s rankings, which NEA collected from 11,675 out of 14,007 school districts, reflect the 2017–18 academic year. Its estimates, which incorporate the 2018–19 school year, show projected wage increases in some walkout states, though they aren’t enough to offset an average decline in salary when figures are adjusted for inflation.)
American wages have been slow to recover since the 2008 recession overall, but teacher salaries remain notably low. The left-leaning Economic Policy Institute reported on Wednesday that weekly wages for public-school teachers have steadily declined since the mid-1990s, even as wages rose for comparably educated professionals in other industries. Teachers earned, on average, 21.4 percent less than other college graduates in 2018, up from 5.3 percent in 1993. States simply aren’t paying new teachers enough to continue to attract people to the field, even though a national teacher shortage is gradually becoming more severe.
States that need teachers find themselves in a trap of their own making. The recession also can’t fully explain what EPI terms the teacher wage penalty, or the pay gap between public educators and college graduates in other fields. As EPI points out in its report, the wage penalty exists partly because of state-level policy decisions. Many state governments kept their education budgets low even as the economy’s health began to improve. Though cuts were concentrated in Republican-governed states, some traditionally Democratic states have failed to restore school-funding levels to their pre-recession standards. At the same time, a number of states have cut funding for public colleges and universities, which contributes to rising public-college tuition — and, inevitably, higher debt loads for teachers, who must figure out ways to pay off steep loans with salaries that would be inadequate even if they didn’t have any debt. According to one report from the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, the State of Connecticut slashed its higher-education budget by 20.2 percent from 2008 to 2018. Delaware, where Democrats have controlled the executive branch and both chambers of the state legislature since 2009, cut higher-education funding by 26.2 percent over the same time period. In a call with reporters, NEA president Lily Eskelsen-Garcia said that when the union asks colleges of education why they’d experienced what she calls “a precipitous drop” in the number of prospective teachers, they cited low pay and student loans as deterrents.
State disinvestment in education might not be the only reason teachers remain so underpaid. Eskelsen-Garcia cited gender discrimination as another possible influence on the teacher wage penalty. “It occurs to me, especially as a woman elementary-school teacher, that you also have to look at the fact that we still have a pay gap between what are traditionally seen as primarily women’s professions and what are still primarily men’s professions, that women still earn 80 percent of men’s salaries,” she said. “It’s actually worse if you’re an educator. 76.6 percent of educators are women, and we have this increasing pay gap. No one can convince me that that’s a coincidence.”
Perhaps what’s most surprising about the RedforEd movement is that it didn’t happen sooner. Though there’s already some evidence that teachers won more school funding by walking out, the NEA’s report makes it clear that they’re fighting against pay inequities that have been entrenched for years. As teachers in South Carolina prepare for a day of protests on May 1, state governments should take heed. Walkouts will likely continue until working conditions finally – and permanently – improve.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 29, 2019
Why Trump Is Soft on White-Supremacist Terrorism

Last week, President Trump repeated his absurd claim that he had never called the Nazi protesters who descended on Charlottesville in 2017 “very fine people.” On Saturday, yet another white-supremacist attack, on a synagogue in California, demonstrated the point that Trump and his allies wish to obscure: Right-wing terrorism is a more extreme version of Trump’s own political style. It draws inspiration from his ideas and some measure of protection from his political power.
Conservatives have long denied any links whatsoever between the brand of white supremacy represented by Nazis or the Ku Klux Klan and Republican-style conservatism. Conservative books like Jonah Goldberg’s Liberal Fascism: The Secret History of the American Left, From Mussolini to the Politics of Meaning and Dinesh D’Souza’s The Big Lie: Exposing the Nazi Roots of the American Left have tried, absurdly, to identify these movements with the left side of the ideological spectrum.
The rise of Donald Trump has made this strained argument preposterous. Trump is not a white supremacist; if I showed you a block of text from one of his speeches side by side with a speech by David Duke, you would be able to tell the difference. But Trump’s rhetoric has excited and mobilized white supremacists because it teases the same theories that they make explicitly. Trump paints unauthorized immigrants as bloodthirsty rapists and murderers and touts their arrival as part of a geopolitical conspiracy to demographically transform the United States.
“A lot of people say” the caravan he hyped was funded by George Soros, Trump suggested last fall. (Trump favorite Lou Dobbs is one of the people who was saying this.) Trump’s closing campaign ad railed against “a global power structure that is responsible for the economic decisions that have robbed our working class, stripped our country of its wealth, and put that money into the pockets of a handful of large corporations and political entities,” juxtaposing this inflammatory claim over images of Soros and other Jewish figures.
The message is surely lost on the vast majority of Trump’s voters, but not on the white-supremacist movement. The shooters in New Zealand, Pittsburgh, and California all articulated this nativist theory in their manifestos.
To be sure, Trump formally denounces terrorist attacks on Jewish and Muslim worshippers. But he is not very good at masking the difference between those condemnations he offers grudgingly and those that have real passion behind them. When asked last month if he considered white-supremacist terror a growing threat, he demurred, “I think it’s a small group of people that have very, very serious problems, I guess.” Trump portrays white supremacists as a tiny force disconnected from politics. In contrast to his rhetoric about ISIS or other Islamist terrorism, which he insists must be labelled Islamic, Trump shrinks from placing white-supremacist terror in its ideological context. Just a handful of crazy nuts with big problems.
Some apologists ascribe the president’s reticence to mere stubbornness: Trump resents being pushed into a corner by the media, they say, and so he refuses to back down from any statement. The problem with this theory is that a certain softness about white-supremacist terror is official Republican doctrine.
In 2009, the Department of Homeland Security wrote a classified report highlighting the dangers of right-wing domestic terrorism. The report outraged conservatives by predicting, accurately, that the election of a black president would stoke far-right violent extremism. One hook Republicans used to discredit the report was its claim that white supremacists would target service members and law enforcement for recruitment, which they claimed was a slur against veterans.
The right’s primary objection to the report was in the link it posited between violent extremism on the one hand and the backlash against Obama and the federal government on the other. “It’s no small coincidence that Napolitano’s agency – referring to Homeland Security director Janet Napolitano – “disseminated the assessment just a week before the nationwide April 15 Tax Day Tea Party protests,” argued Michelle Malkin. The Drudge Report hyped the story with a banner warning, “She Is Watching You.” John Boehner insisted Napolitano “owes the American people an explanation for why she has abandoned using the term ‘terrorist’ to describe those, such as al Qaeda, who are plotting overseas to kill innocent Americans, while her own Department is using the same term to describe American citizens who disagree with the direction Washington Democrats are taking our nation.”
This episode took place at a time when Republicans were committed to presenting the tea party as a movement of principled deficit hawks sincerely concerned about inflation and debt-financed outlays. Yet their backlash against the Homeland Security paper reflected their recognition of a political affinity between their brand of anti-Obama panic and the violent kind identified by the department. The paper did not make the connection between tea-party protests and paranoid or violent extremism; Republicans drew the connection themselves.
The dynamic has only intensified in the Trump era. At a hearing on white-supremacist terrorism earlier this month, Republicans kept derailing the conversation. “Every time Democrats talked about President Trump’s anti-immigrant remarks, or how government agencies should do more to fight the spread of white nationalism, Republicans pivoted to criticism of identity politics, anti-Semitism on the left and off-topic foreign policy issues,” reported NPR.
Republicans do not wish to defend white supremacists, but they feel enough kinship with them to treat them as political allies and to consider measures directed against them as a shared threat. The way you can tell Republicans are soft on white-supremacist terrorism is that white-supremacist terrorism is a partisan issue.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 28, 2019
68 Minutes With David Brooks
The conservative columnist takes a look inside his soul. But what does he see?
It was 2013, and David Brooks was in the wilderness. Not the literal desert or jungle or anything like that, but the emotional wilderness of an accomplished man who, in midlife, has discovered a deep emptiness at his core. His marriage of 27 years was falling apart. The genteel conservatism in which he was nurtured and raised was morphing into something craven, naked, and raw. Lonely and living alone in an apartment in Washington, D.C., Brooks, 52 at the time, took stock and saw that in his rise to the pinnacle of American punditry, he had failed to make or keep meaningful friendships. And what was happening to him, Brooks writes in his new book, The Second Mountain, was happening on a nationwide scale. “The crisis in our politics is created by the crisis in our sociology and in our relationships — and in our morals,” he told me, looking preppy, eager, and somewhat slighter than I’d imagined, as we sat drinking coffee at a chain restaurant near Carnegie Hall.
But Brooks picked himself up. He landed a gig at — where else? — Yale, teaching a class about — what else? — humility, with a syllabus including works by Edmund Burke, Reinhold Niebuhr, and himself. His emotionally arid existence bloomed again, thanks to the loving presence of a woman — Anne Snyder, his researcher at the New York Times and 23 years his junior. After years of chaste but charged email exchanges on subjects such as Dorothy Day and St. Augustine, Snyder agreed to go on a date with Brooks in 2016. They married in 2017. And while The Second Mountain purports to describe the hyperindividualism of American politics and society as a disease and wonkily offers cures that fans of Oprah absorbed long ago, it would not be hyperbole to say that it is also, both explicitly and between the lines, a gushing paean to romance from a gobsmacked man happily rediscovering sex. As such, it is full of cringeworthy aphorisms. “Love,” writes Brooks, “plows open the hard crust of our personality and exposes the fertile soil below.”
Brooks won’t talk about what went down between him and his ex-wife, but he holds up his current romantic situation as a kind of standard: “There was a period when I was dating” — including a “deeply thoughtful” woman in New York — “and nothing felt like this. I can only report the truth. I am very definitely in love.”
The Second Mountain is a “wisdom” book that collects and reflects on fortune-cookie insights drawn from the Great White Male Thinkers (though he mentions a smattering of others, including yours truly on page 23), largely about the importance of self-sacrifice and community. “I think I have a bias — because I’m decent with words — toward glibness and shallowness, and I’ve tried to struggle against that through writing,” he tells me. “Like, to write my way to a better person.”
Brooks worries, a little, that his new book will be considered “woo-woo,” but he also knows that his base — the senior executives who hear him speak at the end of a three-day retreat on corporate health-care costs — will “eat it up more than any other audience. They have nobody in their lives who talks this way. I’m exaggerating, but the country is hungry for ‘How do you do relationship?’ ‘How do you lead a good life?’ ”
I ask Brooks whether he can see the irony: the pundit preaching on holiness, the public intellectual holding forth on humility, the middle-aged divorcé lecturing on love, the defender of the Republican aristocracy writing a book about the sacred poor. But self-knowledge has never been Brooks’s particular strength — or rather, in its mix of self-mocking, striving, and naïveté, his view of himself can fail to come into focus. “I don’t see myself as a privileged person,” he says, hesitating. “I make more than people — well, maybe I should take that back. Yeah, I do take that back.”
He works on the editorial page of the New York Times, I point out. “Yeah, but what is that? A lot of people work at the New York Times with a lot of different views. You work at New York Magazine.”
Brooks says he doesn’t read his negative press. In recent years, there has been quite a lot. The Never Trump League, of which he is a member, has evolved from a passionate Republican resistance movement to a small, ineffectual band of complainers. Critics on the left charge that Brooks’s professorial pose has turned tone-deaf. The more damning critique is that Brooks refuses to own up to his part in the current political crisis — that his defense of previous Republican administrations and Establishment ideals, and his continued support of conservatism in the tea-party era, contributed to the election of Trump himself. Since Brooks is at a moment of self-interrogation, the question presents itself. What does he think now of his boosterism of, say, George W. Bush?
“The question is, how boosterish was I?” parries Brooks.
“You were pretty boosterish.”
“I supported the war, which was obviously the biggest judgment error of my career,” he concedes. And now that he’s thinking back on it, he’d like to mention other regrets. In 2008, when Sarah Palin was John McCain’s running mate, “I called her a cancer. I should not have called a person a cancer.” Anything else? “There was a column I wrote about weed.”
What about his years of antagonism toward Barack Obama? “There are certainly things I got wrong,” Brooks answers. “I opposed the Detroit bailout. It was a clear win. That was good policy. In retrospect, everything is better if Trump is your vantage point.” Here Brooks displays his infamous elasticity, reminding me that at the start of the 2016 primary race, he wrote a mournful column called “I Miss Barack Obama.” “I certainly do,” he says now. “What’s happened to the Republican Party is cataclysmic.” And though he’s watching the large Democratic field with fascination, he’s not up to making prognostications. So far, the technocrat Cory Booker appeals. “I like Biden, but apparently I’m not allowed to do that,” he says. “I think he’s a good man, a genuinely good man — and he touches me a lot, too.”
These are not exactly the views of someone who has been “radicalized,” but Brooks presses on. What he really wants to talk about is Weave, the nonprofit he started with his friends at the Aspen Institute, which shines a light on community builders far from the “inner rings”: the teachers and coaches and protectors of refugees and domestic-violence victims who are motivated to do their work by a sense of necessity, vocation, and love. Brooks has met hundreds of these community leaders on his travels — “23 states over the past year,” he says proudly — and heard so much fury at racial injustice he was moved to write a column supporting reparations for slavery, five years after Ta-Nehisi Coates. 
“Maybe racial injustice is at the core of everything,” he says. “I’ve had that thought.”
“Would you say that you got woke?” I ask. “Woke?” he says. He looks surprised at the word. “I guess that is the dictionary definition.” He puts up little air quotes with his fingers. “David Brooks Gets Woke,” he says. Then he laughs a little.
Lisa Miller



Apr. 28, 2019
Wall Street Democrats Are Absolutely Freaking Out About Their 2020 Candidates

Convened by two veterans of liberal fund-raising — investors Steven Rattner and Blair Effron — the group had no hard-and-fast agenda except to share notes on the overflowing field of candidates. The crowd of Democratic heavyweights, including Clinton-administration Treasury secretary and Goldman Sachs and Citi alum Robert Rubin, former ambassador to France Jane Hartley, and venture capitalist Deven Parekh, knew most of the contenders well. But coming to some kind of consensus, picking a plausible candidate they felt they could all live with and throw their considerable money behind — that was a far-fetched proposition.
“There’s tremendous fear,” said one banker who was there. The candidates who had long cultivated relationships with Wall Street — such as Cory Booker and Kirsten Gillibrand — were struggling to gain traction and had grown more hostile to finance as their party had, too. Joe Biden, leading in early polls, had a comforting history in the Obama White House and a reputation as an Establishment Democrat but had never, until a few months ago, maintained any meaningful relationship with Wall Street, hadn’t even announced his candidacy yet, and struck many bankers as a dubious bet to beat Donald Trump. Nearly everyone else in the field, the financiers felt, was being pulled leftward by Bernie Sanders (the preposterously well-funded contender they considered too crazy to even imagine in the White House) and Elizabeth Warren (less crazy, Democrats on Wall Street think, and way more competent). “She would torture them,” one banker told me. “Warren strikes fear in their hearts,” explained a New York executive close to banking leaders from both parties — so much fear that such investors often speak of the U.S. senator from Massachusetts, a former law professor and consumer advocate, as a co-front-runner with Sanders. “How do we come up with an alternative?” asked one person at the dinner.
There were a few options, none perfect. Beto O’Rourke had recently launched his campaign, and his congressional record was essentially a centrist-shaped blank slate. Pete Buttigieg was a McKinsey alum who came from the Rust Belt but talked like a Silicon Valley exec or an Obama Treasury official, but no one, yet, took him seriously.
Kamala Harris was a favorite of many in the room. The U.S. senator from California now describes herself as a populist and highlighted a past confrontation with JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon over foreclosures in her pre-campaign book, but in 2012, as California’s attorney general, she passed on prosecuting OneWest and its CEO, Steven Mnuchin. In this cycle, she has been the Democrat perhaps most active in seeking Wall Street money (Citi vice-chairman Ray McGuire and Pine Street partner Brian Mathis are helping with her Wall Street outreach, and she recently headlined a fund-raiser hosted by LionTree CEO Aryeh Bourkoff) and occasionally its advice (BlackRock’s Michael Pyle, an Obama-administration alum, is advising her on economics). “People are generally in search of a candidate who has the right set of views, has the right character, but also can win,” Rattner told me later. “Right now, it is very hard to see who checks all three boxes.”
There was no agreement. By evening’s end, multiple donors walked away planning to write checks to three or four or five candidates — hoping they stay relatively moderate — rather than going all in on any one. Among the committed Democrats on Wall Street, this wait-and-see, as-long-as-it’s-not-Bernie-or-Elizabeth posture has become the norm. “This is like venture investing. You really don’t know who’s going to break out, but your hope is you have a good portfolio and that one of these investments breaks out,” Bruce Heyman, a former Goldman managing director and ambassador to Canada, told me.
Of course, these longtime donors are more committed to the Democrats than the average guy on Wall Street. Two years ago, Trump seemed noxious enough that Democrats (reasonably) hoped to continue growing their considerable advantage over Republicans in the New York finance set. But one GOP-driven tax cut and one leftward shift in the Democratic Party later, a worried handful of bankers is considering turning that story on its head. “They’re too far left! They’re too far left!” said Alex Sanchez, CEO of the Florida Bankers Association. “I mean, honestly, if it’s Bernie versus Trump, I have no fucking idea what I’m going to do,” one Democratic hedge funder told me. “Maybe I won’t vote.”
Democratic donors aren’t especially worried about policy; few have sussed out where candidates stand on Dodd-Frank or the carried-interest tax loophole, and few believe that, aside from Sanders or Warren, any contenders are likely to make an aggressive new push for regulation as president. What agitates them instead is — in a replay of the alienation they felt during the Obama presidency thanks to a few stray “fat cats” comments — how Democratic rhetoric threatens their sense of status. No moment crystallized the new reality more than when former Colorado governor John Hickenlooper — a centrist candidate who was a prominent business owner in Denver before entering politics — refused to even call himself a capitalist in a Morning Joe interview in March.
Before Trump won, Hillary Clinton had outraised him by a margin of more than four to one among the financial crowd, which had long regarded him as a pariah because of his shady record and bankruptcies. Now? “The anti-corporate, anti–Wall Street direction of the Democratic Party is driving Democrats into the Trump camp, which is, in most cases, the last place they want to be,” said Kathryn Wylde, CEO of the Partnership for New York City, the business group that counts among its members all of the city’s major financial institutions. “The fact that he’s raised as much money as he has is a reflection of how many Democrats are holding their nose and supporting him because they feel demonized by the Democrats.” In mid-April, Trump’s team revealed it had raised over $30 million in the first quarter of 2019, slightly more than the top two Democratic candidates combined. If you add up all the Democrats’ dollars, the challengers are way ahead — but among donors, and indeed among the candidates themselves, the perception remains that the president is accumulating a real edge. Meanwhile, Goldman released its 2020 outlook: Trump, the firm concluded, now has a “narrow advantage.” Even Paul Singer, the GOP hedge-fund magnate who backed efforts to defeat Trump in 2016 — and who funds the Washington Free Beacon, which first paid for the anti-Trump research that later became “the dossier” — stopped by a small Trump fund-raising roundtable in New York late last year. “Well, we must be doing well now that Paul’s here,” Trump said.
“Wall Street for Trump is the reverse Bradley effect,” said hedge-fund manager Anthony Scaramucci, the Republican fund-raiser who (very) briefly served as Trump’s White House communications director, referring to the theory that voters overstate their support for nonwhite candidates in polls. “They all secretly love him, but because of their clients and the polarity, they don’t want to say it out loud.”
Over coffee recently in midtown, an investment pro with a long history in Democratic politics described the struggle to resist the unexpected pull of Trump. “What matters more?” he asked, looking up at me. “My social values or my paycheck?”
Meanwhile, parts of the Democratic field were doing the same, with most candidates focused on building Sanders-style small-dollar, email-driven fund-raising machines. (Sanders raised $10 million that way in just his first week as a candidate.) “It’s kind of stunning how a bunch of these people running for president haven’t gotten ahold of [a list of top past contributors] and said, ‘What can I do to get this person?’ ” fumed a hedge-fund honcho out of the loop for the first time in two decades. “It’s sort of basic political IQ.”
“Everyone wants to seem relevant,” one prominent investor told me. But for the first time he or any of his friends could remember, “we’re just not fucking relevant. We’re not that big of a deal anymore. None of us!”
“A lot of the donor community is worried about losing their presidential perks and ambassadorial gigs to baristas,” said veteran New York Democratic fund-raiser Robert Zimmerman. “It’s long overdue.”
Those candidates still reaching out to Wall Street have mostly done so underground, visiting the homes and offices of wealthy donors while adamantly demanding secrecy — at least seven candidates privately auditioned for a group of 16 leading Obama donors in D.C. in February. The memory of Sanders supporters derisively showering Clinton’s motorcade with dollar bills as it drove into George Clooney’s home for an expensive 2016 fund-raiser remained particularly searing. Morgan Stanley managing director Tom Nides, a deputy secretary of State under Clinton (and a friend of Minnesota senator and 2020 Democratic presidential candidate Amy Klobuchar’s since they interned for Walter Mondale together), last year hosted a handful of likely candidates for a series of private dinners with potential supporters. But no bank has set up any meet-and-greets like the ones then-Senator Obama lit up in 2006. For the first time, campaigns have started sending out invitations to formal private fund-raising events without either the hosts’ names or the entry price printed on them, just in case they leaked. “They don’t want to get Bernied,” said a former bank executive.
Not everyone is playing the same game. When he left the vice-presidency, Biden — historically a lousy fund-raiser, with threadbare finance ties beyond Delaware’s credit-card industry — established a network of post–White House organizations and took care to stack them not just with longtime aides and friends but with Wall Street’s Democratic heavy hitters. Last spring, he installed a policy advisory board for the new Biden Institute at the University of Delaware, including JPMorgan’s Peter Scher, KeyBank’s Don Graves, former Treasury secretary Larry Summers, and onetime Goldman investor Eric Mindich. Now, said one top party fund-raiser in New York, “there’s a lot of praying for Joe Biden.”
But some high-flying former Obama fund-raisers who witnessed Biden at the former president’s side worry about his prospects against Trump. For them, there was Beto. In considering a run, O’Rourke consulted with former top political aides to Obama, such as David Plouffe, but as his own decision deadline neared, he started picking the brains of a handful of Obama’s top-tier donors and bundlers. One, private-equity exec Mark Gallogly, became convinced O’Rourke was the young inspirer needed to lead the anti-Trump movement and flew to meet with the congressman and his family. Investment banker and former ambassador to the U.K. Louis Susman, meanwhile, also jumped onboard, making calls across Wall Street to construct a fund-raising operation for him. “He will probably raise more money than any candidate in the history of our presidential politics, and he will do so not just with large donors but with more money [from donations of] under $500 than anyone in our history of presidential politics,” predicted Gilbert Garcia, a Houston investor. “A lot of senior people are going to get involved. You had a lot of senior people get involved for Obama. You’re going to see that effect.”
Nearing launch day, O’Rourke reciprocated. In calls with potential supporters, he asked for advice, and hours before making his campaign official, he rang Robert Wolf, the former UBS chair. He had no specific ask, he said — he’d just heard Wolf was a good person to know for the road ahead. When he did announce, on a Thursday morning in March, Biden’s top lieutenants, led by right-hand man Steve Ricchetti, made a round of calls to top potential supporters that afternoon to head off the threat.
Now Biden has his team, O’Rourke his, and Harris hers — with power bases in California and New York. If you were one of the 100 campaign bundlers who’d attended Harris’s private New York City finance kickoff earlier this year, her team presented you with an ask: to commit to raise $27,000 each in the first quarter of the year. But when the quarter ended, you also saw the team’s publicly shared numbers; of the $12 million she raised, more than half came from online sources, where her average contribution was $28. Those figures reinforce the lesson of Sanders’s kickoff and O’Rourke’s $6.1 million day one: Big in-person fund-raising events have, in many cases, gone out of style, and many big-money donors are still playing wait-and-see. Others have pushed Michael Bennet, the senator from Colorado, and Mitch Landrieu, the former mayor of New Orleans, to enter the race. Earlier this year, 105 of the party’s most in-demand donors convened in south Florida for a private retreat to consider their next investments. Veteran Democratic strategist James Carville addressed the group over dinner and asked who among them had committed to a presidential candidate. Just four hands went up.
But on a recent morning in Manhattan, a handful of Wall Street’s Democratic power brokers got to chatting after a breakfast fund-raiser for a congressman. The topic was unavoidable: In recent weeks, a new name had entered the fold. Now, as the donors spoke, more news trickled out. A growing array of influential bundlers in the finance world had made their choice to support the new entrant, even though many had planned to stay neutral far longer. Hedge-fund manager Orin Kramer, for one, was onboard after meeting the candidate in person a few weeks earlier. David Jacobson, the onetime ambassador to Canada who is now a BMO vice-chairman — and who helped organize the auditions in February — was too. And Steve Elmendorf, a D.C. lobbyist who has worked closely with Wall Street leaders for years, made his choice. He even changed the background of his Facebook page to match the moment: It’s now a wide shot of a large crowd looking up at a stage with a massive PETE 2020 sign staring back.
*This article appears in the April 29, 2019, issue of New York Magazine. Subscribe Now!
Gabriel Debenedetti



Apr. 28, 2019
What We Know About the Southern California Synagogue Shooting

A woman has been killed and a rabbi and two other people injured after a domestic terrorist attacked a synagogue north of San Diego, on Saturday morning. The gunman, who expressed white-supremacist and anti-Semitic views in a manifesto published before the attack, fled but was quickly apprehended. The attack happened approximately six months to the day after 11 people were killed in an attack on the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh. Below is everything we know so far.
Just before 11:30 a.m. on Saturday, a 19-year-old gunman armed with an AR-15-style assault rifle walked into the Chabad of Poway synagogue in Poway, California, and began firing on those inside. About 100 people had assembled at the synagogue for a celebration of the last day of Passover. The shooter, dressed in a green military vest, fatally wounded 60-year-old Lori Gilbert-Kaye, who jumped between him and Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein, 57, who was delivering the sermon at the time of the attack and was subsequently injured in the hands. An 8-year-old girl, Noya Dahan, was struck in the face and leg with shrapnel, and 34-year-old Almog Peretz took shrapnel in the leg while trying to shield and evacuate children from danger. Some witnesses say the lone gunman shouted obscenities as he fired. His rifle apparently jammed, which appears to have limited the carnage. He then fled.
An off-duty Border Patrol agent who was working as a security guard at the synagogue fired on the shooter several times as he drove way, but only struck his car.
Shortly after, about two miles from the scene, the gunman pulled over and called 911, telling the dispatcher that he was involved in the attack and providing his location. A San Diego police officer responding to the shooting then apprehended the suspect, who surrendered without incident. His assault rifle was sitting on the passenger seat of his car.
The shooter, later identified as John T. Earnest, reportedly posted a hate-filled “open letter” on social media beforehand in which he expressed white-supremacist views and claimed responsibility for an attempted arson at a mosque in nearby Escondido last month. (No one was injured in that attack, as the fire was quickly discovered and put out, and a message referencing last month’s Christchurch mosque attacks was left behind by the arsonist.)
All four victims were taken to nearby Palomar Media Center, where Gilbert-Kaye ultimately died. The injuries to the other three victims were not life-threatening, and they were later listed in stable condition.
Poway mayor Steve Vaus quickly called the attack a hate crime, citing witnesses’ accounts of what the shooter said while firing on his victims. Vaus also indicated in an MSNBC interview that he believed the congregants’ response prevented more bloodshed, insisting that, “We are grateful to those in the congregation there that engaged the shooter and prevented this from being a much more horrific incident.”
“Sadly, we’re seeing these things happen all over the country, and now even in our backyard,” San Diego County sheriff Bill Gore said on Saturday.
Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein, who founded the Chabad of Poway and was injured in the attack, apparently continued his sermon after the shooter fled. A member of the congregation told CNN that “he did not leave his congregation until he was finished speaking to them — calming their fears and pledging resilience.”
The investigation into the attack and gunman was quickly underway, including a search of the shooter’s home in a neighboring town. Authorities believe the attacker acted alone, but police in San Diego and Los Angeles nonetheless announced on Saturday that they were expanding their patrols at local synagogues just in case.
The Chabad of Poway is part of the Chabad-Lubavitch Orthodox Jewish Hasidic movement, which is one of the world’s largest Hasidic movements, and is focused on outreach and education for other Jews. The synagogue was founded 33 years ago in Poway, a middle-class suburb of roughly 50,000 residents that is about 25 miles northeast of San Diego. Since the attack happened during the Sabbath, some Jewish congregations in the region did not fully become aware of the attack until much later in the day.
John T. Earnest is a 19-year-old white man who lives in Rancho Peñasquitos, which is just west of Poway. He has no criminal history and no known links to white-supremacist groups, Sheriff Gore said on Saturday.
In an anti-Semitic manifesto attributed to Earnest and published to the white-nationalist-frequented message board 8chan just over an hour before the attack, the gunman described himself a “man of European ancestry,” quoted the Bible, and wrote of his hatred and “disgust” for Jews. He said he had been inspired by the deadly attacks on the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh last October and a pair of mosques in New Zealand last month — both of which were perpetrated by white supremacists. Saturday’s shooting also happened approximately six months, to the day, after the Pittsburgh attack, which was the deadliest attack on Jews in U.S. history.
Earnest was attending college at Cal State University, and had gone to Mt. Carmel High School before that, where his father was a science teacher until retiring in 2016.
The author claimed that he was a nursing student and had been planning the assault for less than four weeks, insisting the ease and speed in which he conceived and carried out the attack was a “testament to the fact that literally anyone can do this.” He also took credit for last month’s early-morning arson attack at the Islamic Center of Escondido, which is only nine miles from the synagogue in Poway. That claim has not yet been confirmed by police.
In his purported 8chan post, the gunman included a link to his Facebook page and said a livestream of the attack “will begin shortly.” The Facebook page, which was deactivated several hours after the attack, reportedly contained no livestream link. NBC News noted on Saturday that the 8chan post is nearly identical, in tone and (Q&A) format, to the one left by the Australian gunman who killed 50 people at two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, on March 15.
Lori Gilbert-Kaye, 60, was killed in the attack after apparently throwing herself between the gunman and the rabbi in order to protect him.
Her husband, a physician, was also in the synagogue during the attack and the San Diego Tribune passes along the harrowing story of how he discovered that she had been shot:
Gilbert-Kaye, who had a 22-year-old daughter, was instrumental in helping found and support the congregation over its more than three-decade history. Regarding her heroism on Saturday, a close friend told the Tribune that, “When we heard what happened, we all said to ourselves, ‘yes, that’s how Lori would have wanted to go — I’m pretty sure if she could have picked a place to die, that would’ve been it. She died how she lived.”
Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein, 57, had both of his index fingers blown off after he instinctively raised his hands when the gunman fired at him. Goldstein, who founded the Chabad of Poway in 1986, has also served as a Jewish chaplain for the San Diego Sheriff’s Department. Congregants said he delivered a sermon after the gunman fled, despite his injuries, telling the survivors, “They can’t break us.”
Speaking with NBC News on Sunday morning from the hospital, Goldstein called for resolve in confronting anti-Semitism and remembered Gilbert-Kaye, who he said was a dear friend and a “pioneering family member of our congregation.” He also had a message for the country:
He also spoke out in response to the Christchurch massacre last month:
Goldstein has a deep connection to Brooklyn, where he lived before heading west in his early 20s. The Daily News reported on Saturday that his father Yossi “helped build the Chabad sect in Crown Heights and was a key lieutenant of much-revered Rebbe Menachem Mendel Schneerson.”
Almog Peretz, a 34-year-old Israeli immigrant, was injured with shrapnel in the leg while trying to rush children to safety during the attack. Here’s what he told the Times of Israel:
Noya Dahan, an 8-year-old girl and Israeli immigrant, was struck in the face and leg with shrapnel during the attack. She was attending the Passover celebration with her family. They had left Sderot, Israel, for California after several close calls during rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip, according to Dahan’s father, who added that their home in the U.S. had been spray-painted with swastikas back in 2015. “We came from fire to fire,” he said after the synagogue shooting.
This post has been updated throughout to reflect new information as it became available.
Chas Danner



Apr. 28, 2019
Report: Barr May Bail on House Democrats’ Mueller Report Hearing

The Justice Department has told House Democrats that Attorney General Willam Barr will be a no-show at this week’s House Judiciary Committee hearing on the Mueller report, unless they change their questioning format. At issue, reports CNN, is whether or not Barr would be subjected to 30 minutes of follow-up questions from committee lawyers for each party — as he only wants to face questions from lawmakers, who would only get five minutes each to question the attorney general.
Under the Democrats’ plan, committee counsel would be able to fill in gaps or dig deeper into areas of Barr’s testimony. In other words, lawmakers might not be able to ask all the questions they have, or have enough time to hold Barr accountable over his answers — and a cleanup session by party counsel would solve for that.
It would seem that Barr doesn’t want to face that level of scrutiny or thoroughness, however, and is now threatening abandon his promise to testify if Democrats don’t change the plan.
Responding to that threat on Sunday, Judiciary committee chairman Jerry Nadler said there would be consequences if the attorney general won’t voluntarily appear. “[Barr] is not going to tell the committee how to conduct its hearing, period,” Nadler told CNN. If Barr skips the much anticipated hearing, he’ll be served with a subpoena, “and we will have to use whatever means we can to enforce the subpoena,” he added.
Barr, who has long vowed transparency regarding the Mueller report but mostly delivered obfuscation and egregious spin instead, also opposes the Democrats’ plan to take the hearing behind closed doors to go over the unredacted Mueller report, wanting instead to discuss a less redacted version of the report.
CNN notes that there is still time to iron out some kind of deal ahead of Thursday’s hearing, and it’s not clear if Barr is just bluffing in an effort to make his testimony less intensive. But if he skips out on the hearing, it would confirm his and the Trump administration’s disregard for congressional oversight and the rule of law, and — along with the subpoena fight for the unredacted Mueller report, or the efforts to obtain Trump’s tax returns — provide yet another path to a constitutional crisis.
Chas Danner



Apr. 26, 2019
2020 Candidates Begin Signing Unity Pledge, With Sanders Taking the Lead

Yesterday I wrote an appreciation of the grassroots progressive group Indivisible’s “unity pledge,” an effort to keep the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination contest from what Barack Obama warned might become “a circular firing squad.” It was pretty simple, committing candidates to a positive campaign respecting their rivals’ sincerity, an immediate endorsement of the winner, and a strong common effort to beat Trump. But simple as it was, it seemed necessary given the competitive pressures of a huge field representing quite different ideological and strategic views. I went so far as to argue that voters consider their own pledge not to support those refusing to sign the pledge.
A day later, the pledge campaign is off to a good start, with five candidates having already signed it (in alphabetical order): Cory Booker, Pete Buttigieg, Julian Castro, Jay Inslee, and Bernie Sanders.
It’s significant that Sanders was the first to sign the pledge:
As Ruby Cramer noted yesterday, the pledge was in no small part motivated by bad memories of discord during and after the 2016 primary fight between Sanders and Hillary Clinton — less between the candidates than between their fiercest supporters:
Perhaps Sanders’s leadership here will help inspire the rest of the field to sign on to the pledge quickly, the first and essential step toward making it stick.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 26, 2019
Democratic Voter Support for Impeachment Cooling As Fight for It Heats Up

Anyone paying attention to elite Democratic opinion since the redacted but revealing Mueller report came out has felt impeachment sentiment heating back up after Nancy Pelosi’s efforts to tamp it down earlier this year. It seethes from progressive Twitter, from restive House members, and most recently from two major presidential candidates, Elizabeth Warren and Kamala Harris (with others inching in that direction), and one currently minor candidate, Seth Moulton. The reason for this upsurge in impeachment fever is obvious: Mueller documented multiple incidents of presidential obstruction of justice while making it clear that only Congress (or voters) had the power to do anything about it. Meanwhile, the Trump administration is stonewalling any congressional efforts to get at the truth through hearings or subpoenas. And while Pelosi clearly still believes that impeachment could mess up promising Democrats’ plans to beat Trump in 2020, others are convinced beginning the process is the best and only way to dramatize his crimes and corruption in order to beat him. Still others adamantly say impeaching him is necessary to defend the Constitution no matter what it means politically.
But as a new ABC/Washington Post survey shows, this upsurge in support for impeachment that’s in the air may be colliding with an actual decline in support among rank-and-file Democrats. Asked if “Congress should or should not begin impeachment proceedings that could lead to Trump being removed from office,” 62 percent of self-identified Democrats answered affirmatively (53 percent favoring it strongly), while 29 percent said they were opposed. These numbers favoring impeachment sound pretty high until you realize that in August 2018 the same pollsters found that 75 percent of Democrats wanted to begin impeachment proceedings, with 63 percent backing that course of action strongly. The earlier poll was taken after Michael Cohen’s first set of guilty pleas and Paul Manafort’s first conviction, but otherwise isn’t explainable as some sort of aberration. And ABC/WaPo isn’t the first pollster to find Democratic impeachment sentiment declining this year; CNN had a similar finding last month:
What hasn’t much changed is Republican rank-and-file opposition to impeachment. Last August’s ABC/WaPo poll showed 82 percent of self-identified Republicans opposing it (71 percent strongly). Now 87 percent oppose it, 78 percent strongly. This should dash any fantasies about Republicans coming around to a pro-impeachment stance as they did when Richard Nixon was president.
Now it’s always possible that after the Mueller findings and some of the conclusions drawn from them sink in, Democratic support for impeachment will rise again. But it’s also possible that as we get closer to the 2020 election, many will agree with presidential candidate Bernie Sanders’s argument that it’s a “distraction” from a presidential campaign that is the only way Trump can actually be removed from office.
It’s an intraparty argument that won’t last very long, since the House will definitively move one way or the other before long. But it’s important to see the quiet ripples under the surface of a debate that sometimes gets very loud.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 26, 2019
Kansas Supreme Court Recognizes State Constitutional Right to an Abortion

With two Trump appointees now reinforcing a solid majority conservative bloc on the U.S. Supreme Court, the survival odds of a federal constitutional right to an abortion as we have known it since Roe v. Wade came down in 1973 are not very good. In anticipation of the day when states will again have significant leeway — if not total control — in the area of abortion policy, many Republican-controlled states have been enacting laws that blatantly violate SCOTUS standards, implicitly inviting the Court to change everything. There has even been a countertrend in some Democratic-controlled states to hedge against the reversal of Roe with their own policies protecting abortion rights (most famously in New York, which enacted a Reproductive Health Act in January). All told, ten states now have laws protecting abortion rights at least until fetal viability, according to the Guttmacher Institute.
But no malleable state statute protecting a right is any substitute for a constitutional guarantee. So that’s why it’s so significant that the Kansas Supreme Court has now recognized a state constitutional right to an abortion as inherent to language acknowledging “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” as “inalienable natural rights.” Since this language, drawn from the Declaration of Independence, has been popular among constitution-drafters over the centuries, it represents a coup for abortion rights that might be replicated elsewhere. And it wasn’t a close decision, since six of seven justices concurred with this reasoning (as reported by NPR):
Though rooted in a different constitutional premise, the Kansas court’s conclusion is similar to the standard set by SCOTUS in Roe and in Planned Parenthood v. Casey.
The case arose from a challenge to a 2015 law enacted by the Republican-controlled Kansas legislature that banned all abortions using the dilation-and-evacuation method, the most commonly used procedure for second-trimester abortions (and representing an estimated 9 percent of abortions in Kansas). Conservative legislators, of course, are already vowing to pass a constitutional amendment to overturn the decision and restrict abortion rights, which would have to be ratified in a statewide referendum. But they won’t get any support from pro-choice Democratic governor Laura Kelly, unlike the governor who signed the 2015 law, culture-war stalwart Sam Brownback.
In a parallel development earlier this month, the Vermont Senate overwhelmingly passed a constitutional amendment specifically recognizing the right to an abortion; the state House is likely to follow suit, but that state’s provisions for amending the constitution would require a second vote and then a referendum which can only happen in November 2022 at the earliest. There’s no telling what will be left of Roe v. Wade by then. But for the time being, the rights of women in Kansas are safe.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 26, 2019
The Biggest Threat to Biden’s Candidacy Isn’t the Left, It’s Biden Himself

Most weeks, New York Magazine writer-at-large Frank Rich speaks with contributor Alex Carp about the biggest stories in politics and culture. Today, Joe Biden’s campaign launch, Trump’s battle against congressional subpoenas, and the White House boycott of the White House Correspondents’ Association Dinner.
After weeks of buildup, Joe Biden has officially launched his presidential campaign with an argument that he’s the best option for stopping a Trump second term and returning things to normal. Is it a convincing pitch?
Biden isn’t the only one who thinks he’s the best man to defeat Trump. Democratic voters favor him in polls, and it’s nearly impossible to find an article about his candidacy that doesn’t reiterate the common perception that he’s the “most electable” of the 20 Democrats in the field. That assertion is then usually qualified with two not insignificant caveats: (1) Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton were thought to be the most electable candidates at this point in the 2016 election cycle, and (2) every Biden presidential campaign has gone off the rails, sometimes even before reaching the departure terminal. Still: Might Biden’s last hurrah surprise us? One can never say never to any far-fetched political scenario in the age of Trump.
Intentionally or not, Biden’s campaign launch was weirdly Trump-like in the style of its pitch: heavily nostalgic for a vanished American past, deeply invested in the candidate’s well-worn personal image, and eschewing policy specifics in favor of a broad, emotion-based call to arms. Fittingly, the musical accompaniment was orchestral and plush, the cursive onscreen font was worthy of Hallmark c. 1965, and the black-and-white images apotheosized America’s 20th-century glory days. The content, to be sure, was un-Trump. Biden doesn’t aspire to Make America Great (i.e., White) Again but to make New Deal–Great Frontier–Great Society liberalism a rallying cry again. Biden’s post-announcement itinerary was no less retro: an old-style fat-cat fundraiser, a union rally, and a cozy drop-in at The View. He has a comfort zone as predictable in its septuagenarian ways as Trump’s rounds of golf at Mar-a-Lago.
In the video, Biden embraced the anti-alt-right protestors in Charlottesville and linked them, by newsreel juxtaposition, to Martin Luther King Jr. But in 2020 it may not be enough for Democratic candidates of a certain age to wrap themselves in the classic liberal tropes of their youth. It’s telling that the day before Biden announced, Bernie Sanders was booed by some of the black and Hispanic women in a Houston audience when he talked about marching with King; Sanders’s sin was to use that hallowed past as a shield to dodge answering a question focused specifically on the white supremacists of today. In the same vein, Biden’s own King evocation was deflated only hours later by an intrusion of present-day political reality: the Times report that he had reached out by phone to Anita Hill on the eve of his launch — a mere quarter-century late — and had impressed her not with his contrition but with his enduring cluelessness about the legacy of the Clarence Thomas confirmation hearings he so epically mismanaged.
For all the chatter about whether AOC Democrats in the party’s base will accept a centrist like Biden, the real threat to Biden’s viability is Biden himself. Not just his checkered past record, but his ability to adapt to present circumstances and react to them in real time. Given that he was far from fluent in the vice-presidential debate pitting him against Sarah Palin in 2008, it’s hard to imagine him besting Democratic debate opponents like Elizabeth Warren or Kamala Harris or Pete Buttigieg. The issue is not necessarily whether his views are progressive enough but whether he is culturally limber enough in a fast-moving new order. (This may also be a growing challenge for the didactic Sanders, Biden’s current runner-up in polling.) In the end, the only real premise of Biden’s candidacy, besides its comforting old-shoe avuncularity, is as narrow as he says it is: He is determined to bring down Trump. But so are his 19 primary opponents and the entire Democratic electorate. What makes Biden think he is the one man who can do it is that he sees himself as the corrective for the three states that cost Clinton the election. He presents himself as Wisconsin, Michigan, and Pennsylvania incarnate, as mandated by central casting — white and male and old and fluent in Rust-Belt-ese. But given his tendency to overdo, one imagines he’ll pander to Wisconsin, the state Hillary failed to visit, with such alacrity that he’ll be campaigning door-to-door in Green Bay wearing a Cheesehead hat before we know it. While I have no more idea than anyone else who will win the Democratic nomination, history is rife with generals who lose by refighting the last war.
Since the release of the Mueller report, Trump has vowed to fight “all” subpoenas for administration officials to testify in front of Congress, a move that hasn’t been seen since the days of Nixon.  Is he helping or hurting his case?
There is no case. Trump is not on impeachment trial in the Senate, and he has not been indicted in a court of law. As his ever more diarrheic Twitter dumps tell us, he can’t even decide whether the Mueller report is an exoneration or a hatchet job. Having gotten away with obstructing justice — for now, anyway — he has moved on to the task of obstructing government lest any more damning evidence come to light between now and Election Day. If there is one legal concept he understands besides bankruptcy, it’s the value of wholesale nuisance litigation to stonewall adversaries (and creditors) and avoid consequences for his serial illegality. His blanket ban on any administration officials, past or present, appearing before Congress, even to testify about non-Mueller related issues (like the Census and the awarding of security clearances), will bury the remainder of his term in a tsunami of court battles masterminded for maximum distraction by his new Roy Cohn, William Barr.
Of all Trump’s defiant moves since the publication of the redacted Mueller report, the most telling may have been his declaration that “if the partisan Dems tried to impeach, I would first head to the U.S. Supreme Court.” That reaffirmed not just his ignorance of the Constitution (which gives the Supreme Court no role in impeachment), but his belief that Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh will subvert the law to protect him, just as Barr is doing. How do we know that they won’t? Now that Trump seems likely to get away with shutting down the congressional prerogative of applying checks and balances to the chief executive, it only makes sense that the Court would be next in his sights. Nothing is impossible as long as the Republican Party in general, and its Vichy tribunes in the Senate, have his back.
Trump also extended his feud with the press by barring administration officials from the upcoming White House Correspondents’ Association Dinner, which itself has been criticized in recent years for fostering too much coziness between political reporters and the people they cover. Is his boycott a gift to the organization?
Yes. This annual circus should have died of embarrassment in 2006, when Stephen Colbert, that year’s comic host, affronted the audience by daring not only to be rude to George W. Bush but to point out that many of the stone-faced journalists in the room had been stenographers for the administration’s false bill of goods for invading Iraq. That the thin-skinned and deferential Washington press corps of that time overwhelmingly treated Colbert’s appearance as a flop — even as it went viral with the public on YouTube — was as much evidence of the post-9/11 breakdown in the American press as all the fake news of Saddam Hussein’s WMDs that the Bush-Cheney White House planted in the Times and elsewhere. That these same reporters could be seen reveling on-camera and slobbering over celebrity invitees of far less consequence than Colbert only added to the cheesy horror of it all.
“It’s possible the White House Correspondents’ Dinner won’t even be the most glamorous thing on C-SPAN this weekend,” observed Politico. Sad! Trump’s successful crusade to usher this spectacle into oblivion — first by refusing to attend, now by refusing to allow his flunkies to attend — was undertaken for all the wrong reasons, of course. He wants to destroy, punish, and vilify a free press that is working hard to hold him to account, and he mistakenly believes that killing the dinner will help advance the goal. In fact, the reverse is true. The demise of this yearly ritual of journalistic debasement is a gift to the press and arguably one of the very few positive achievements of the Trump presidency.
Frank Rich



Apr. 26, 2019
Consultants Are Already Deserting Marie Newman’s Campaign Over DCCC Rule

Marie Newman only launched her campaign against Dan Lipinski, the incumbent Democrat who represents Illinois’s Third Congressional District, last month. But the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee may have already tipped the scales to favor Lipinski, who opposes legal abortion rights, and against Newman, who is pro-choice. In March, the DCCC announced that it wouldn’t work with vendors who sign on to insurgent campaigns against incumbent Democrats like Lipinski. Now, four consultants have left Newman’s campaign, the candidate told Politico on Friday. “We’ve now had two mail firms say that they couldn’t work with us because of the DCCC issue, and then a [communications] group, a compliance group and several pollsters,” she said.
Lipinski does not represent a solidly conservative district, and Newman nearly defeated him in a primary in 2018. The news that consultants are already leaving Newman’s campaign will likely exacerbate an ongoing furor over the DCCC’s policy. The Intercept reported on Thursday that Democrats on 31 college campuses have announced their own donation boycott of the DCCC. Though students aren’t major donors to the party, one Harvard Democrat told the Intercept that they are still “stakeholders” in the party, and that the campaign is “more about using this language of boycott to draw attention to the issue and to use our platform as students to hopefully get them to reconsider the policy.” The policy could, they fear, keep a younger, more diverse class of Democrat out of office. Politico also reports that Representative Cheri Bustos, who heads the DCCC, met with Our Revolution leaders this week; the progressive organization, which was founded by veterans of Senator Bernie Sanders’s 2016 presidential campaign, delivered a petition to Bustos asking the DCCC to change its policy. Justice Democrats, who backed Representatives Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Ayanna Pressley against Democratic incumbents, have created an alternative list of campaign vendors who are willing to work with primary insurgents.
Newman’s nascent campaign has the potential to test outsider groups like Justice Democrats, alongside more established party partners like NARAL Pro-Choice America and EMILY’s List. Pro-choice organizations backed Newman against Lipinski in 2018, and could do so again in 2020. The DCCC, meanwhile, appears committed to its incumbent policy despite growing outcry. “The DCCC has worked to change how Washington works, increase transparency in politics and be perfectly clear with all its partners about the standards it expects of them,” an aide told Politico.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 26, 2019
Is Beto Losing His Mojo? Did Mayor Pete Steal It From Him?

Anyone paying close attention to the early phases of the 2020 Democratic presidential nominating contest cannot help but notice an almost dialectical relationship between two young white male candidates, Beto O’Rourke and Pete Buttigieg, thought to be “charismatic,” but in quite different ways. Neither has the kind of credentials usually associated with successful presidential candidacies, but both have already had alternating meteoric moments in national media and the polls.
Earlier this year “Beto-mania” was a thing, as a once-obscure three-term House member from West Texas who set fundraising records while throwing a scare into Ted Cruz in the 2018 midterms had former Obama political aides signing up for his presidential effort, and drew big and youngish crowds everywhere he went. But more recently South Bend, Indiana, mayor Pete Buttigieg has taken off like a rocket, sporting an unconventional biography (he’s a married, gay, devoutly Christian, multilingual, Afghanistan veteran) and an undeniably media-savvy knack at telling “narratives,” particularly concerning the economic struggles of the Rust Belt, where most Democrats feel they must beat Trump.
As Mayor Pete soaked up media attention, O’Rourke seemed to shrink from it, focusing on early-state travel and the kind of small but intense voter interactions that made him a legend in Texas. As Max Greenwood recently observed, it’s raised some eyebrows:
Whether or not there’s any causal relationship between Beto’s occlusion and Buttigieg’s emergence, it’s hard to miss the fact that they’ve been moving in different directions:
Coincidentally or not, the two men have represented bandwagons heading in different directions in the polls. O’Rourke briefly reached double digits in three national polls in March, immediately after his announcement of candidacy, even as Mayor Pete languished in obscurity. In a CNN poll taken from March 14–17, for example, Beto was at 11 percent while Buttigieg was at one percent. But in a Monmouth survey released earlier this week, Buttigieg was at 8 percent and O’Rourke was down to 4 percent.
So is the Texan doing better in those early states where he’s cultivating grassroots relationships? Not really. Though polling in these states is too sparse to be definitive, it does show the same trends as national polls. In RealClearPolitics’ average of Iowa polls, Buttigieg is at 11.3 percent and O’Rourke is at 5.3 percent. In New Hampshire, the RCP averages show Mayor Pete at 13 percent and Beto at 4.5 percent.
Some observers argue that the very intensity and size of the early competition has “nationalized” the Democratic race:
There is certainly precedent for candidates operating under the radar in early states, focusing on building a campaign infrastructure that will flower into support later on — particularly in Iowa, whose caucuses require a serious organizing effort. O’Rourke’s campaign manager, Jen O’Malley Dillon, has extensive Iowa experience, and an impressive résumé including service as executive director of the Democratic National Committee and deputy campaign manager for Obama in 2012.
Sometimes the “to the masses!” approach has worked in Iowa, while other times it hasn’t. In 2012 Republican Rick Santorum was all but invisible nationally as he labored through low-cost Pizza Ranch venues and reached all 99 Iowa counties. On caucus night he won, and wound up being Mitt Romney’s most durable opponent. But in the 2016 cycle, former Maryland governor Martin O’Malley did everything Democratic candidates are supposed to do in Iowa, investing in state and local candidates early on and practically living in the state — and was crushed by the national Clinton and Sanders juggernauts.
What Santorum had that O’Malley lacked was an ideological connection with likely caucusgoers that attracted and mobilized them more than all the media buzz ever could. And that raises the question as to whether the decidedly nonideological O’Rourke campaign can make the same kind of connections via sheer personal charisma at a time when so many other candidates are offering Democratic voters red meat and policy specifics.
Meanwhile Pete Buttigieg has to show he can build an actual grassroots organization from the money and fame his charisma has generated, as CNN recently noted:
Recent history has also been marked with candidates whose buzz and national poll standings never translated into a workable campaign organization, like momentary Republican sensation Ben Carson in 2016.
So both of these young white men with the unconventional backgrounds could turn into flashes in the pan, which would gratify those who think they’ve gotten undue attention at the expense of candidates who are women or people of color. But if they both survive, we will eventually find out whether one’s success means the other’s failure.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 26, 2019
Prison Is Torture. Voting Is Self-Defense.

Earlier this year, the New York Times obtained more than 2,000 photographs documenting conditions inside the St. Clair Correctional Facility, a state prison in Springville, Alabama. It published five of them, writing of the rest, “It is hard to imagine a cache of images less suitable for publication — they are full of nudity, indignity, and gore.” Upon receiving the same photographs from the Southern Poverty Law Center — which has spearheaded multiple lawsuits against the Alabama prison system in the past two decades — Splinter published a larger selection, describing the images as “both repulsive and newsworthy.” Indeed, they illustrate vividly the degree to which prisons across the United States translate the public’s thirst for punishment into habitats of sustained torture. Several of the photos depict blood-soaked torsos pocked with knife holes. Gore saturates bathroom floors and serves as ink for despairing messages scrawled on walls. Close-ups of slashed wrists and incinerated bedding in solitary-confinement cells — set ablaze, in many cases, to catch the attention of guards during medical crises — merely hint at the degree to which these institutions both facilitate the suffering of those they contain and then ignore their pleas for mercy. “As with war, it is impossible for the public to truly grasp the hideousness of what is happening without being able to see it,” Splinter’s Hamilton Nolan writes.
It is insufficient to say of such violence that it is the inevitable result of concentrating depraved people in a confined space. More than half of state and federal prisoners are mentally ill, and prisoners meet the threshold for serious psychological distress at three times the rate of the general population. Suicides in prison outpace murders threefold. The psychological erosion that takes hold during incarceration manifests itself in ways that would devastate even the best-adjusted free person: social isolation, a plummeting sense of self-worth, and degrees of interpersonal distrust and suspicion that verge on paranoia. The most pathological forms of conflict resolution that exist outside of prison are magnified inside. If civilian life greets mental illness, interpersonal conflict, and social dysfunction with state-sanctioned violence, imagine what happens in a place where almost no mechanisms for nonviolent mediation exist; where everyone but the armed guards lacks any social or political capital that might improve their lot; and where the worst mistakes a person has made — and, in all likelihood, ever will make — become the justification for the near-total abandonment of their humanity by the state.
So when Americans talk about incarceration, they are not actually talking about proportionate consequences for bad behavior. They are talking about physical and psychological torture. They are talking about civil death. Some imprisoned people have done monstrous things, but a government that is willing to build a system of punishment based on its most vicious denizens — and then routinely emulate their behavior and call it justice — has no moral standing that retributive vigilantism does not share. It is an empty vessel for the basest whims of its residents. It is a sham on par with the liberative pretensions of America’s slave-owning founders.
Yet many Americans seem oblivious, or indifferent, to the reality that millions of their countrymen are routinely stripped of their civil rights and subjected to such degradation. One would be forgiven, hearing the arguments against allowing incarcerated people to vote that have unfolded in the past several days, for believing that disenfranchising prisoners is part of a self-evidently reasonable process by which people who do bad things get put on a timeout from society. It is an old debate about an even older practice, but gained traction on Monday when Senator Bernie Sanders, who is running for the Democratic nomination for president in 2020, was asked by an audience member at a CNN-hosted town hall whether he thinks incarcerated people should be permitted to cast ballots — including people who have committed serious violent crimes, like the surviving Boston Marathon bomber, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev. “I think the right to vote is inherent to our democracy,” Sanders replied. “Yes, even for terrible people, because once you start chipping away and you say, ‘Well, that guy committed a terrible crime; not going to let him vote. Well, that person did that; not going to let that person vote.’ You’re running down a slippery slope.”
Sanders is right, particularly on the latter front. (The efficacy of punishment is a bigger debate.) The franchise has throughout U.S. history been allocated based on ever-shifting standards of “fitness.” The unfit for decades included women, people who did not own property, and almost all black people. Only when the powerful were compelled to treat the vote as an inalienable right was progress made. And to this day, that progress is incomplete. The notion that voting is not a right, but a privilege — and a politically expedient one for Republicans, at that — is used to rationalize a range of suppressive measures, from prisoner disenfranchisement to restricting the ballot to persons with government-issued identification cards and, if GOP legislators in Florida get their way, people who have completed their sentences but not paid the attendant monetary fees. In this light, rescinding the franchise from anyone is not just a slippery slope that endangers the rights of everyone. It facilitates a self-fulfilling prophecy: The people whose lives are most thoroughly controlled by the state become those with the least say in how it operates.
The fallout from this gap is apparent in what poor stewards Americans outside of prisons have been for their incarcerated counterparts. The starkest evidence lies in places like St. Clair, but facilities across the country boast conditions that are only slightly more humane. In all of them, almost every pretense of rehabilitation has been abandoned in favor of punishment. And the extremity of that punishment is dictated almost entirely by what voters and officials outside of prison are willing to stomach — which, as one can see, is practically bottomless in its appetite for degradation. It is hard not to conclude, given such conditions, that punishment has become an endgame uninterested in whether it is just or effective in reducing crime. Its goal is to inflict relentless pain. And given that other constitutional rights for prisoners remain intact, at least nominally — including freedom of worship and speech — revoking the franchise assumes an arbitrary tint. Its reflexive defense is that prisoners have proven themselves unfit to make laws, having broken them. But this argument withers under scrutiny.
 If committing crimes precludes one from being fit to vote, for example, one must account for the rampant criminality of many elected lawmakers and the countless ways they criminalize everyday life — a level of discretion that has, in the past, been used specifically to restrict voting rights. If one narrows this rubric so that only violent criminals are disenfranchised, one must account for much of violent crime’s roots in policy failures — like poverty, segregation, and inadequate mental health resources — and how imprisoning their victims, who are frequently victims of violence themselves, all but guarantees perpetual indifference toward them. This is to say nothing of the vast majority of people who violate laws but never get caught, let alone sent to prison, and a lack of evidence that proclaiming fitness in such a haphazard way creates a more responsible electorate. In fact, few who disagree with Sanders even bother making this case. Most are content to presume that anything besides the status quo is outlandish. “You lose your freedom,” Mayor Pete Buttigieg said of what happens in prison — as if its reasonability were self-evident. “And I don’t think during that time it makes sense to have that exception.”
No shortage of rigorous and eloquent arguments have been made for allowing prisoners to vote, both before and since Sanders’s comments. Earl Warren’s majority opinion in 1958’s Trop v. Dulles U.S. Supreme Court case makes the oft-cited constitutional argument for doing so: “Citizenship is not a license that expires upon misbehavior,” he writes. “And the deprivation of citizenship is not a weapon that the Government may use to express its displeasure at a citizen’s conduct, however reprehensible that conduct may be.” Two states — Maine and Vermont — already allow it, as do countries as structurally and culturally disparate as Japan, Sweden, Zimbabwe, and Peru. Letting prisoners vote is central to legitimizing American democracy. But there is perhaps no more vivid illustration of its opposite than what it is like to actually be in prison. Civil death precipitates civil invisibility. Prisoners have no say in their lot, and American voters and elected officials have responded by punishing their silence with torture. It is hard to say whether this would fundamentally change upon re-enfranchisement — only that leaving it up to the rest of America has mostly made it worse for those affected, even after official investigations are conducted and vows made to improve conditions, as occurred recently with the Justice Department and Alabama. Prison itself is the problem. A society that expels from its conception of humanity so many people who are sick, or in pain, or who make mistakes based upon which their entire lives are suddenly deprived of the opportunity for redemption, is an immoral society. But most Americans will not see that unless prisoners have a voice in that society. Giving them the vote is not the whole answer, nor is it the only one. But it is an essential beginning.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 26, 2019
Obama Had a Green New Deal, and It Worked. Let’s Do That Again.

Last month, the Green Advocacy Project conducted a poll on the Green New Deal. The results are alarming. Slightly more Americans oppose the idea (46 percent) than support it (43 percent), but the truly catastrophic finding is the imbalance in passion. The opposition is extraordinarily intense, with nearly all opponents of the Green New Deal registering strong opposition, while those in favor are split between supporting it strongly and only somewhat. And this of course is happening before anybody has even attempted the difficult-to-impossible task of translating the Green New Deal’s mostly popular precepts into specific proposals with concrete trade-offs.
So, remind me, why are we doing this again?
By “this” I don’t mean an ambitious plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. I mean the specific political and policy design choices embedded in the Green New Deal, to whatever extent they exist. Those choices include insisting on a 10-year target for phasing out greenhouse gasses rather than the 30-year schedule required by the Paris climate accords, tossing in an array of non-climate-related policies like universal health care and guaranteed jobs for all, and avoiding important emissions-reducing tools like nuclear power.
The most explicit rationale, as Dave Roberts has laid out (see here and here) is to kindle mass activism on an unprecedented scale to radically expand the parameters of what Washington can and will do on climate policy. Two months ago, Roberts was hailing the incipient arrival of this game-changing movement, castigating the critics who dismissed its vast potential. “A wave of grassroots enthusiasm like this isn’t fungible,” he wrote. “It can’t be returned to the kitchen in exchange for a new one with the perfect mix of policy and rhetorical ingredients. It is lightning in a bottle, easily squandered.”
More recently, acknowledging the poll (which he brought to my attention) showing that the enthusiasm is heavily weighted against the Green New Deal, Roberts is presenting the grassroots wave as a future aspiration rather than a countable asset. “Intensity is what matters in politics,” he argues. “Democrats and climate hawks need to figure out how to generate some.” Roberts is a brilliant policy analyst from whom I have learned enormously. But I believe the theory of political change upon which he has hung his support for the Green New Deal strategy is showing its fatal flaws.
The second rationale for the Green New Deal is the belief that Democrats need a radically different strategy because what they tried under the Obama administration failed. Mike Konczal defends it as “a reaction to the failed strategy of cap-and-trade.” Kevin Baker, writing in Harper’s, calls Obama’s climate agenda “woefully inadequate in the first place,” and insists it has “now largely been squashed by President Trump.”
This widespread belief understates both the scale and the durability of Obama’s climate reforms. An overinflated sense of failure has always hung over the last president’s climate agenda, in large part due to the high visibility of his failure, and the inconspicuousness of his success. Obama sought, and failed, to pass a cap-and-trade law through Congress in 2009 and 2010. The defeat played out over a year, in full view of the media, and left behind a devastated and disillusioned core of activists who saw their work smashed against the Senate filibuster.
The successes, by contrast, occurred with barely any fanfare. Obama’s stimulus included $80 billion in green energy subsidies, the largest investment in renewable energy technology in American history. The stimulus was written and passed in mere weeks, during an atmosphere of economic crisis when its impact on a long-developing environmental problem hardly registered with the news media. (Its tax credits for wind and solar power were extended in 2015, as part of a low-profile bipartisan budget deal.)
While the Republican capture of Congress closed off any chance of major new climate laws after 2010, the administration pursued an aggressive agenda through regulation and diplomacy. Obama imposed a wide array of new regulations on power plants, cars, buildings, public lands, and elsewhere. In 2014, Obama struck a bilateral greenhouse gas emissions deal with China, which paved the way for the global Paris climate accords the following year.
Baker’s notion that Obama’s agenda has been “quashed” contains some grains of truth. The Trump administration has launched a vigorous effort to roll back Obama’s regulations, and announced its refusal to abide the Paris agreement while throwing itself behind a campaign to revive coal and other dirty energy sources. But even if this rollback were completely effective, it could only reverse the regulatory aspects. Trump can’t un-spend stimulus funding that was spent before he took office.
And in any event, Trump’s rollback has been uneven at best in its implementation. It’s been hampered by incompetent staffing, and has lost an extraordinary 90 percent of the court battles over its regulatory changes. Some of the rollback has been blocked by state resistance, especially in California. And the sheer economic power of the changes Obama helped to set in motion has overwhelmed Trump’s efforts to reverse them. Despite all his efforts to revive coal, the industry has continued to shrink. Solar and wind power have quintupled over the last decade. Meanwhile, Trump’s refusal to abide the terms of the Paris accord has not unraveled the entire deal, which remains largely intact. And worldwide participation is the key thing, since the United States accounts for a shrinking minority of global emissions.
None of this is to say that Trump has had no effect, or that the world is on track for a positive outcome. The urgency of the the climate crisis is such that the crisis has already arrived, and rapid and accelerating speed is required to avert deeper disasters. Merely slowing down the pace of the response is a serious act of sabotage. But that is all Trump has done — he’s put some speed bumps on the path his predecessor forged. He has not erased the Obama climate agenda any more than he erased Obama’s health-care reforms (as Obama critics predicted would occur, with equal confidence, after Trump’s election).
All of this suggests Obama’s presidency offers a model, after all, for how the next Democratic president can address climate change. The three tools used by the 44th president — green energy investment as part of a stimulus bill, tighter regulation, and aggressive international diplomacy — may lack the transformative ambition of the Green New Deal. But the Green New Deal is nowhere close to overcoming either the technocratic challenge of designing workable policies to fulfill its grand designs, or the political challenge of enacting them.
A scaled-up version of Obama’s model, by contrast, is workable. Democrats might have to alter the rules for what kinds of spending the Senate allows to pass with 50 votes to allow for green energy subsidies. That will be a hard task when the 50th Senate vote comes from a red state, but not as hard as getting that 50th vote to approve a revolutionary overhaul of the entire economy. It’s not impossible to imagine a Joe Manchin or a Kyrsten Sinema approving a bill to deploy lots of new green energy infrastructure if it included enough investment for their states.
In addition to whatever spending can pass the Senate, they can use regulations and diplomacy to leverage enormous amounts of positive change. And, as the Obama era shows, the three tools work especially well in concert. Investing in green energy brings down the cost of these technologies, making tight regulations easier to design and comply with. (Power companies couldn’t easily phase out dirty fuel sources until clean ones became cheaper; car companies can bring down their fuel intake because electric cars have become cost competitive.) Tighter regulations create a market demand for more clean energy innovations. And the more affordable these new technologies become, the easier it is for more leaders of developing countries to commit to a green energy path.
Is this suite of reforms going to be “enough”? No, nothing is going to be enough — even eliminating all greenhouse gasses tomorrow would leave the planet dangerously overheated. But more is better than less. The Green New Deal’s advocates are already starting to realize how desperately unlikely it is to yield anything resembling its promises. (Roberts calls it “a long shot — a desperate Hail Mary in a game where time is running short.”) Why would Democrats turn their backs on a model that has actually produced important progress for a desperate long shot?
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 25, 2019
The Most Popular Governors in America Are Republicans in Blue States

In these days of intense partisan polarization, politicians who can appeal to voters across the red-blue divide sometimes seem to be few or far between. When, for example, Democrat Doug Jones won a Senate seat in bright-red Alabama in a 2017 special election, it was a very big deal, even though the peculiar nature of the GOP nominee (theocratic twice-removed-from-office judge accused of preying on very young women), Roy Moore, made it less shocking.
But at the gubernatorial level, it’s an entirely different picture. As Morning Consult’s latest quarterly measurement of approval/disapproval ratings of the nation’s chief executives show, there’s a hardy band of blue-state Republicans who are quite popular. Indeed, four of them (in order of popularity, Charlie Baker of Massachusetts, Larry Hogan of Maryland, Chris Sununu of New Hampshire, and Phil Scott of Vermont) are among the most popular five governors in the country.
What makes the story even more interesting is that three of these governors have been elected and reelected in very blue states. Hillary Clinton beat Donald Trump by 27 points in Baker’s Massachusetts, and by 26 points in Hogan’s Maryland and Scott’s Vermont (Sununu’s Granite State is technically blue, having been carried by Democrats in the last four presidential elections, but it has been extremely competitive).
A closer look at the dynamics of these states shows how these Republicans have thrived and survived. In the three very blue states mentioned above, the GOP is so weak that it has eschewed the usual conservative ideological litmus tests in favor of surviving on patronage from governors who are allowed to be as liberal as is necessary to win elections. They essentially serve as counterweights to heavily Democratic legislatures, without getting far from dead center. All of them (plus Sununu) are pro-choice, which becomes remarkable when you realize there is no longer a single pro-choice Republican in the U.S. House, and just two in the U.S. Senate. These are birds with highly adapative colors. No wonder one of them, Larry Hogan, has discussed running against Donald Trump in the 2020 GOP primaries without getting much guff from Maryland Republicans. Everyone understands that in the unlikely event Hogan takes the plunge, he’d lose massively and immediately and then end the nonsense and come home.
Outside this exotic four, there are no blue-state Republican governors at all, though it should be noted that six red-state Republicans are popular enough to give the GOP a clean sweep of the top ten (the most popular of these, Alabama’s Kay Ivy, had the good fortune of replacing a scandal-plagued predecessor in that heavily Republican state).
There are currently six Democratic governors serving in states that Trump won in 2016. Three of them (Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania, Tony Evers of Wisconsin, Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan), however, are from states Democrats regularly won before Trump, with the latter two taking office after the 2018 Democratic-wave elections. Another, Jon Bel Edwards of Louisiana, won in 2015 after scandal-plagued Republican senator David Vitter tried to replace failed Republican governor Bobby Jindal. Another, Roy Cooper of North Carolina, won a razor-close victory in the razor-close 2016 election in his state. The real outlier is Montana’s Steve Bullock, who ran far ahead of the Democratic presidential candidates in his state in being elected in 2012 and reelected in 2016. No wonder he’s thinking about a late entry into the 2020 presidential field.
Bullock’s tied with Delaware’s John Carney for the honor of having the best approval/disapproval ratio (54/28) among Democratic governors, far below Baker’s 73/14 and Hogan’s 71/14, but not bad. The least popular governor is Republican Matt Bevin of Kentucky, at 33/52; unluckily for him and his usually dominant party, he’s up for reelection this year. While the GOP governors at the top have to prove regularly that they are not slaves of their party, Bevin needs to show he’s so nastily conservative that even Republicans find him embarrassing. It should be an easier task, but state politics are quirky enough that anything can happen.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 25, 2019
Biden Botches an Apology to Anita Hill at the Worst Possible Time

So a funny thing happened to Joe Biden’s presidential campaign on its first official day, as it was busily portraying itself as a party- and nation-unifying steamroller led by a confident politician who has learned all the right lessons from earlier mistakes in his long career.
Specifically, this happened, smack in the middle of a day when Team Biden needed to play error-free ball:
As the entire political world wondered exactly what it meant that his campaign was bringing up one of the more damaging episodes of Biden’s long Senate career, the other shoe dropped, in the New York Times:
Hill went on to demand “an apology to the other women and to the American public because we know now how deeply disappointed Americans around the country were about what they saw. And not just women. There are women and men now who have just really lost confidence in our government to respond to the problem of gender violence,” after alluding to allegations that Biden has improperly touched women.
In case there was any doubt left, Hill made it clear that Biden wasn’t her candidate for president.
There may be some backstory that will come out later, but what it looks like now is that Biden decided to try to make peace with Hill before running for president, and failed, and then his campaign had to scramble when Hill gave an interview exposing his rejected half-apology on the eve of his announcement.
How Biden handled this mess raises a number of questions. There are ways to send back-channel feelers in this sort of situation that will give an indication whether engagement of the principals is a good idea. Instead, it sounds like Biden more or less cold-called Hill. Beyond that, given the “sorry for what you endured” thrust of the “apology,” Biden and his staff should have realized in advance that the odds were low that Hill would respond in a gratifying way. Indeed, the possibility that she would angrily reject the communication and redouble her criticism of Biden should have been carefully game-planned. And above all, why didn’t Biden either take care of this chore months ago, or wait until his long-planned launch was consummated? Why run the risk of exactly what happened?
It’s quite possible that this latest revival of one of Biden’s least-successful moments in politics won’t resonate much right away with regular voters; after all, all sorts of recent reminders of Biden’s “baggage” haven’t budged his levels of support in the polls. But it was important for Biden, the putative front-runner, to convey to the chattering classes of politics a sense, on this of all days, that his “baggage” had been left behind, and that the candidate’s past habit of committing gaffes had been left behind as well. Earlier today I wrote an analysis with with this headline: “Biden’s Strategy for Winning the 2020 Nomination: No Early Stumbles.” Little did I know we’d see one before the sun went down.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 25, 2019
Liberal Activists Put a Unity Pledge on the Table for 2020

Having argued a couple of months ago that the usual pieties about Democratic intraparty civility should have particular force going into 2020, I’m interested to see that there is at least one organized effort underway to get presidential candidates to pledge to observe certain rules in an effort to bolster the party’s general-election standing, as Ruby Cramer reports:
It sounds relatively uncontroversial, but it’s hard to get political candidates, who are, by and large, desperate to win, and their staff, whose lives will take a turn for the worse if they lose, to look kindly on a pledge to hold anything back. And there’s always the suspicion that talk of civility represents a sneaky effort to encourage unilateral disarmament by opponents who won’t return the favor. As Cramer notes, one candidate promised recently to stay positive while also vowing to retaliate if he comes under friendly fire:
The problematic underlying reality is that more than a few Democrats believe that only their faction is capable of beating Trump; different Democrats have very different theories as to “electability.” And then there are those for whom winning the “struggle for the soul of the party” trumps any general-election win.
That’s not true of most rank-and-file Democrats, who recognize that Trump is uniquely capable of weaponizing and deploying the conflicts roiling their party in an effort to drag his opponent down to his own level of unpopularity. They would almost certainly trade some transitory triumph for this or that party faction in exchange for ejecting Trump from the White House.
If the “unity pledge” is to catch on, the majority of Democrats, who do value civility and seek common ground, must impose their will on the party’s candidates and their hard-core supporters. That means supporting the unity pledge, of course, but also perhaps going further: How about a pledge not to vote in the caucuses or primaries for candidates refusing to take the pledge? That might get their attention.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 25, 2019
Christopher Hasson May Be Released Pending Trial

Coast Guard lieutenant Christopher Hasson didn’t meet standards for continuing detention before his trial on gun and drug charges, a federal judge has ruled. The judge, Charles Bernard Day, ruled that Hasson’s charges were not severe enough to merit his pretrial detention. Prosecutors had argued that Hasson, an admitted white nationalist who once wrote that “I am dreaming of a way to kill almost every last person on earth,” was too dangerous to release. Hasson had drawn up a kill list, said he admired the white-nationalist murderer Anders Breivik, and wanted a “white homeland.” Authorities discovered 15 firearms, silencers, and 1,000 rounds of ammunition in a search of his home.
As Ryan Reilly reported for HuffPost on Thursday, Day may have been restricted by the law. Federal law doesn’t criminalize domestic terrorism. Prosecutors could — and did — call Hasson a domestic terrorist, but they can’t charge him as one. Federal law may also not apply to Hasson’s alleged plan to kill prominent Democrats and liberal journalists, Reilly added.
Hasson did not walk out of court a free man on Thursday. He will remain in custody until a future hearing, where Day will determine the terms of his pretrial release. According to CNN, Day said he still had “grave concerns” about Hasson, and added that he’s “got to have a whole lot of supervision.”
Sarah Jones



Apr. 25, 2019
Biden’s Strategy for Winning the 2020 Nomination: No Early Stumbles

Now that both Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders have officially ignored my advice not to saddle the Democratic Party with two mid-septuagenarian front-runners for their 2020 presidential nomination, there is naturally a lot of discussion of the former veep’s positioning, messaging, and rationale for becoming Trump’s general-election opponent. But it’s also worth taking a good initial look at how, mechanically, his campaign plans to win his party’s nod.
The threshold question about Biden 2020 was nicely captured by Nate Silver:
Obviously, Biden would prefer to go into the voting phase of the nomination contest as a consensus “unity” candidate who will win almost automatically if no one else catches fire, using his high positive name ID, his support among name-brand party stalwarts, and his fundraising prowess to glide past a divided field in the early states (with the possible exception of New Hampshire, where Bernie Sanders is very strong), then consolidate his victory in March when others are running out of money and time. To cite just one scenario, he could quite possibly end the campaigns of Kamala Harris and Cory Booker if he beats them among African-Americans in South Carolina, demonstrating his breadth of support demographically and geographically. And if none of his self-styled “centrist” rivals (e.g., Amy Klobuchar, Beto O’Rourke and John Hickenlooper) score an early breakthrough, it’s hard to see any of them competing with Biden for long. Indeed, Iowa could be a graveyard for all of those candidacies. And a Biden candidacy that’s perceived by voters as unifying would also be well-positioned to wear down Bernie Sanders, who in turn could do Biden a great favor by squeezing out potential progressive alternatives like Elizabeth Warren.
But can Biden maintain the “unity candidate” mantle? The avalanche of criticism Biden has received in recent months for the “baggage” he brings into the contest — his age, his extensive list of heresies against progressive orthodoxy (from his anti-busing position in the 1970s to his support for the Iraq War), and his discomforting “handsiness” with women — has called into question his ability to remain what I have called “a sort of intraparty Coalition of National Salvation option who could serve as a bridge between the Clinton-Obama era of Democratic politics and the presumably more progressive future.”
Still, all this flak, which accurately reflects elite progressive disdain for Biden, has had approximately zero effect on his standing in public opinion. He’s not simply leading in the polls: He has remarkably positive favorability ratios among Democrats (75/14 in the latest tracking poll from Morning Consult), with a diverse base of support that lacks just one component: the young voters least likely to participate in caucuses and primaries (viz, in the 2016 Iowa Democratic caucuses, 64 percent of participants were 45 or older).
So Team Biden is probably justified in launching his candidacy with what it has described as a “show of force” that’s light on policy and heavy on memories of Joe’s partnership with Barack, even though it makes those who remember the 2016 Jeb Bush campaign cringe with anticipatory embarrassment. At this point Biden can run as a unity/consensus candidate who is the best bet to beat Trump, until something happens that calls that strategy into question. And if that does happen, he can always fall back on the option of running as the factional candidate of Democrats who fear a lefty nominee would play right into Republican plans to depict their party as having lurched off into socialist extremism.
That could transpire if the huge Democratic field is quickly winnowed down to its two currently dominant old white men, Biden and Sanders. The two candidates don’t need some shocking upset to stay alive, and they’re generally best positioned for a long and expensive slog through the March primaries that could decide it all. The odds of that scenario producing an ideologically polarizing contest similar to that which afflicted Democrats in 2016 are high, but Biden has reason to think he could prevail and then unite his party against the existential threat of a second Trump term. Perhaps if the nomination fight becomes a de facto retroactive referendum on the “centrist” Clinton-Obama heritage that Biden represents, the 44th president could be convinced to get off the sidelines and support his old chum.
So there really are two plausible paths forward for Biden, which gives him more strategic flexibility than candidates who have to gamble on elbowing past each other for attention, and can’t afford to undershoot expectations anywhere. Still, as Silver points out, Biden cannot afford any major mistakes:
One plausible scenario is Sanders upsetting Biden in Iowa and then beating him badly in New Hampshire (where Sanders trounced Clinton in 2016). At that point Biden would be looking down the barrel of the historical fact that in the last four decades only Bill Clinton has been able to win the nomination while losing the first two states (and that exception is mitigated by the fact that Tom Harkin’s 1992 candidacy took Iowa off the table). Another possibility is that all that progressive criticism, which so far hasn’t affected Biden’s standing, will finally sink in among rank-and-file Democrats, reducing his lead over the field and forcing him into a factional candidacy that’s far more perilous. And for all any of us know, a particular candidate could indeed catch fire and capture the imagination of primary voters, making Biden look (as I recently suggested) like the north end of a southbound dinosaur.
All in all, Biden’s path to the nomination will require a sure-footedness that some see in this veteran of the political wars, while others noting his proclivity for gaffes think is lacking. An early stumble or two and Biden could be devoured by his hungry rivals like a fat old sheep who doesn’t see an approaching pack of wolves. If he survives all that, he probably is ready to take on the king of wolves in the White House.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 25, 2019
American Workplaces May Be Getting More Dangerous

Two hours. That’s how long it took first responders working to free Jill Greninger’s body from a meat grinder. It’s a story marked beginning to end by hideous details. Greninger’s co-workers at the Pennsdale, Pennsylvania, plant discovered her accident after they heard “strange noises” coming from the grinder, the Associated Press reported on Wednesday. The Lycoming County coroner later told NBC News that Greninger “tragically either fell or was drawn into the machine resulting in her death.” Later, a local news channel reported that Greninger may have been standing on a set of rolling stairs when she fell. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, which is responsible for enforcing workplace safety standards, will investigate her death, NBC added. The investigation could take up to six months.
Greninger’s death occurs at a desperate moment for OSHA. The federal agency suffers from a severe staffing shortage, which undermines its ability to carry out safety inspections. A new report from the National Council for Occupational Safety and Health, released the day after Greninger’s death, says that OSHA now has only 875 health and safety inspectors to cover the 9 million workplaces in its jurisdiction. (OSHA is not responsible for all workplaces. Churches, for example, are exempt from its oversight.) If OSHA’s inspectors chose to visit every workplace in their jurisdiction, the task would take them 158 years to complete, COSH continues. Even when OSHA does investigate a death and finds an employer negligent, the median fine is only $7,500. The median American burial, meanwhile, costs $8,755.
A toothless OSHA can be dangerous for workers, COSH argued. Latinx, immigrant, and contract workers are experiencing especially sharp increases in workplace deaths. The organization also singled out a dozen employers for incidents of workplace negligence in 2018. Greninger’s employer, Economy Locker and Storage, doesn’t appear on COSH’s “Dirty Dozen” list, and it might never; there’s much we still don’t know about her death or the conditions in which she worked. But her death does resemble some of the incidents highlighted in COSH’s report. At a Genan Inc. plant, 26-year-old Byron Jones got pulled into a tire shredder and killed. Jason Holmes died in a trench collapse at worksite managed by Tooma Enterprises Inc. A 2018 news report about Holmes’s death said the construction worker lay buried for hours before first responders could recover him. He smothered to death, in other words; according to COSH, his employer had not placed protective shoring or a trench box on-site. Two tech companies made the list, too. Six workers died in “U.S. Amazon facilities or operations” in 2018, COSH said; thirteen have died since 2013. (In a statement emailed to New York on Thursday, Amazon said the COSH report “should be taken with a giant of grain salt” and added that COSH “is NOT a government entity, it is NOT a group of regulators, and it does NOT have any official understanding of the workings of an Amazon fulfillment center.”) COSH also cited Facebook for failing to provide appropriate support to its content moderators, who are exposed to violent imagery on a daily basis.
COSH’s findings affirm earlier reports about OSHA’s weakened status. Though OSHA has arguably never had the staffing resources it requires to carry out its stated purpose, it began to shrink after President Trump took office. The president disbanded five federal advisory boards that recommend new safety standards to OSHA, ProPublica and the Sante Fe New Mexican reported in 2018. Earlier this year, the National Employment Law Center reported that OSHA’s safety-enforcement activity has declined and the number of inspectors it employs has decreased since 2016. The agency’s staffing shortage appears to be self-inflicted. Like the Veterans Affairs Administration, which reported nearly 49,000 outstanding vacancies in February, OSHA has simply failed to replace workers when they leave the agency. OSHA did not fill a single vacancy in 2017, NELP noted, and now employs “the lowest number of inspectors in its history.”
Nationwide, workplace deaths slightly decreased from 2017 to 2018 — but they’ve increased by 11 percent since 2012. And in workplaces under OSHA’s jurisdiction, fatalities may be on the rise. As the agency’s enforcement activity trends downward, the number of investigations it carries out in response to workplace fatalities or catastrophic accidents that involve three or more workers increased from 837 in 2017 to 921 in 2018 — the steepest such increase in a decade, according to NELP. With fewer resources to spare, OSHA is in a poor position to address Jill Geninger’s death and prevent deaths like hers in the future.
This article has been updated to clarify the employment status of workers who died in Amazon facilities and to include comment from Amazon.  
Sarah Jones



Apr. 25, 2019
Why Republicans Might Not Mind Losing the White House in 2020

While the public ranks of anti-Trump Republicans have shrunk into insignificance by now, it’s still clear — from anecdotal evidence via Republican friends, and from every disclosure of daily business in the White House, whose MAGA warriors regularly mock and thwart POTUS — that while the GOP has solidly lined up behind Trump’s agenda and reelection campaign, there are still serious intraparty misgivings about the Boss. Smart Republicans would have to either laugh or cry or roll their eyes at such astonishing examples of presidential cluelessness as his threat to “head to the U.S. Supreme Court” to stop impeachment proceedings.
Still, in sports and in politics, your team is your team, and to the extent that the GOP’s fate is bound up in Trump’s for the time being, all the eye-rolling is largely kept in private. But you have to figure some Republicans are looking ahead to 2020 and seeing a silver lining in a possible narrow Trump reelection loss, at least so long as the GOP holds onto the Senate.
That’s an entirely plausible scenario, as it happens. Republicans go into 2020 with a 53-47 Senate majority. Only three Republican incumbents are currently rated as vulnerable by the Cook Political Report, and none of them is as endangered as Alabama Democrat Doug Jones. Add in the lively prospect that Joe Manchin may resign his seat to run for governor, almost certainly giving the GOP another Senate seat from Trump-loving West Virginia, and the odds of a GOP Senate in 2021 look quite good, even if Trump again loses the popular vote and doesn’t again pull off the inside straight of an Electoral College victory.
A Republican Senate under the control of Mitch McConnell facing a new Democratic administration would almost certainly replicate McConnell’s obstructionist strategy during the Obama presidency. Indeed, given the intense investment of conservatives in the takeover of the federal judiciary that Trump is engineering to keep his base satisfied, you could envision even more hardball tactics from Senate Republicans on confirmations along with legislation.
Yes, a Democratic White House would mean the end of any grand schemes of conservative policy revolution, and might put off consolidation of an aggressively right-wing Supreme Court (one willing, say, to flatly reverse Roe v. Wade) for a bit. That last factor alone will keep many conservative Evangelicals praying for a Trump win. But consider the advantages to the GOP of a narrow loss:
· The economy won’t keep growing forever. Losing the White House in 2020 makes it more likely Democrats will get the blame for a turndown or a recession — as they largely did after Barack Obama was elected in 2008.
· If Trump is reelected, the 2022 midterms could be a bloodbath for his party, as second-term midterms often are. Twenty-two of the 34 Senate seats up in 2022 are currently held by Republicans. They could use a wind behind them to maintain control.
· A Trump loss, even if it’s narrow, would likely break the grip of Trumpism on the party, keeping its options open for a future in which demographic change makes his brand of white identity politics increasingly perilous. If Trump wins a second term, Mike Pence becomes the presumptive successor, unless the president decides Ivanka is ready to run. But a post-Trump party could arguably bring back some of the cherished orthodoxes — like free trade and neoconservatism — that Trump has forced it to abandon.
· Republicans are temperamentally better suited to being the “out party” rather than the governing party, as its paltry legislative accomplishments in 2017–2018 showed, despite total control of the federal government. From the moment of Barack Obama’s election, however, Republicans went on an extended winning streak that gave them net gains of 12 Senate seats, 63 House seats, 13 governorships, and 23 state legislative chambers. That all ended with Trump’s election, so Democrats might not be the only ones singing “Happy Days Are Here Again” if the 45th president’s turbulent reign ends.
Now, I wouldn’t want to take this hypothesis too far. Republicans would undoubtedly feel pain at the loss of federal patronage that losing the White House would involve; job prospects in Real America for those young men wearing MAGA hats might not be as robust as they might imagine. And if a Trump loss in 2020 also damages GOP positioning in governorships and state legislatures on the brink of the decennial Census (perhaps offset by the thumb on the scales the administration is trying to administer through a citizenship question on the Census), the costs of defeat might be too high and too lasting.
But if Republicans can thread the needle, any tears they shed on Trump’s behalf on November 3, 2020, might be of the crocodile variety. And for the secret band of suppressed Trump-loathers in the GOP (yes, we know you’re there), it’s a more likely recipe for redemption than some doomed primary challenge by William Weld or Larry Hogan.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 25, 2019
Joe Biden Finally Launches Campaign With Video Directly Attacking Trump

“Charlottesville, Virginia is home to one of the great documents in human history.” That’s the line former vice-president Joe Biden used to finally kick off his 2020 presidential campaign, in a video released early on Thursday morning. Though Biden reportedly scrapped plans to launch his campaign with a rally in Charlottesville at the last minute, his video remains focused on the violent white supremacist rally there in August 2017, which gave us one of the biggest lowlights of the Trump presidency so far: the president’s remark that there were “very fine people on both sides.”
Biden spends the first half of the video recounting this “defining moment” in American history. “Very fine people on both sides?” Biden says. “With those words the president of the United States assigned a moral equivalence between those spreading hate and those with the courage to stand against it. And in that moment, I knew the threat to this nation was unlike any I had ever seen in my lifetime.”
This is perhaps the most direct attack on Trump in a presidential launch video, and it suggests Biden plans to underscore his front-runner status by focusing on the general election rather than the 20 or so Democrats he has to fend off to get there. With his Obama-esque logo, Biden is clearly leaning into the idea that voters can give themselves a do-over, and go back to the world as it was before the 2016 election.
“I believe history will look back on four years of this president and all he embraces as an aberrant moment in time,” Biden says. “But if we give Donald Trump eight years in the White House he will forever and fundamentally alter the character of this nation, who we are. And I cannot stand by and watch that happen … that’s why today I’m announcing my candidacy for presidency of the United States.”
The 76-year-old, who launched the first of three presidential campaigns in 1987, is expected to hold his first public campaign event on Monday in Pittsburgh, where he will address union workers. On Thursday night, he’s set to attend a private fundraiser in Philadelphia organized by former Pennsylvania governor Ed Rendell and other longtime supporters, according to the Wall Street Journal. That will be followed by a tour of early voting states in the coming weeks.
Margaret Hartmann



Apr. 25, 2019
Facebook Anticipates FTC Fine of Up to $5 Billion

On Wednesday, Facebook announced that it expected to be fined up to $5 billion by the Federal Trade Commission for privacy violations — the same amount of money as the social network’s initial public offering in 2012. In its quarterly financial statement, Facebook revealed it intended to eat a penalty somewhere between $3 billion and $5 billion.
For months, Facebook has been negotiating with the FTC regarding a violation of a 2011 privacy consent decree. According to the agency, Facebook “deceived consumers by telling them they could keep their information on Facebook private, and then repeatedly allowing it to be shared and made public.” A new investigation was opened in 2018 after the Cambridge Analytica scandal, in which it emerged that Facebook exposed the personal information of almost 50 million users in an effort funded by the right-wing billionaire Mercer family that intended to use Facebook data to cater political advertising toward users in an attempt to influence their votes.
If Facebook’s estimate is anywhere near the actual levy the FTC hands down, it will mark a historic fine against a tech company: the largest prior FTC fine in the field was $22 million against Google in 2012 for misrepresenting to Safari users users “that it would not place tracking ‘cookies’ or serve targeted ads.” As the New York Times notes, the fine could mark a turning point in the political treatment of the tech industry:
But as a financial penalty, the $3 to $5 billion mark won’t dent a company that earns $56 billion in annual revenue in any meaningful way. “Facebook must be held accountable — not just by fines — but also far reaching reforms in management, privacy practices and culture,” Connecticut Senator Richard Blumenthal responded on Twitter. And as the Ringer staff writer Victor Luckerson noted, the social media company appears to be presenting two contrasting faces to the public and to investors:
Matt Stieb



Apr. 24, 2019
Breaking From His Cabinet, Trump Reportedly Okayed Libyan Warlord’s Coup Attempt

In a phone call with Libyan strongman Khalifa Haftar earlier in April, President Trump gave the impression that he condoned the warlord’s attack on the capital city of Tripoli to depose the U.N.-backed government, according to American officials who spoke with Bloomberg. White House resident hawk and national-security adviser John Bolton also reportedly gave the impression that the Trump administration approved of Haftar’s April 4 assault, which has killed at least 264 and displaced around 35,000 individuals.
Earlier in April, the White House gave a different impression of the president’s contact with Haftar. In a statement issued on April 19, four days after the conversation between the two leaders, the White House stated that Trump “recognized Field Marshal Haftar’s significant role in fighting terrorism and securing Libya’s oil resources.”
Critics argue that addressing Haftar with the title of “field marshal” undermined the authority of the U.N.-backed government led by Prime Minister Fayez Al-Sarraj. Haftar, who lived in Virginia for around 20 years before returning to Libya in 2011 for the uprising that deposed Muammar Qaddafi, has been called “Libya’s most potent warlord.” Haftar’s Libyan National Army is supported by Russia, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the United Arab Emirates and is in control of much of Libya’s east and south. While Haftar claims his move on the capital is a counter-terrorist effort, the U.N. envoy to Libya called the maneuver “more like a coup than counter-terrorism.”
The April 19 announcement of their contact and the Bloomberg report surprised both the international community and, most likely, Trump’s own administration. On April 19, Acting Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan said that a “military solution is not what Libya needs” and that the Pentagon and the White House are “well-aligned on Libya.” But it appears that Shanahan did not account for the possible influence of other authoritarian-leaning powers in the region. As Bloomberg reports:
Trump giving his own administration the foreign-policy runaround is yet another example of his approach in the Middle East and North Africa: favoring the word of authoritarian governments — particularly ones on the Arabian Peninsula — at the expense of his own Cabinet’s suggestions and the American intelligence community. Consider past examples of extremely similar behavior, like when Trump decided to pull American troops from Syria while on the phone with Turkish leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan, or his refusal in November 2018 to condemn Saudi crown prince Mohammed bin Salman for the death of Jamal Khashoggi: “It could very well be that the crown prince had knowledge of this tragic event — maybe he did and maybe he didn’t!”
For governments abroad, the president’s reported support of Khalifa Haftar is another successful template for how to influence American foreign policy in the Trump era. For Trump, it appears to be an opportunity to bulk up the list of strongmen he can call on for foreign-policy advice.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 24, 2019
Franklin Graham Tells Buttigieg to ‘Repent’ Being Gay

For Christians in the Western tradition (the Eastern Orthodox Easter is this coming Sunday), it’s the joyful season of the Resurrection, when sackcloth and ashes are put aside and believers celebrate the redemptive love of God for all of humankind.
But for conservative Evangelical leader and Trump supporter Franklin Graham, intolerance is always in season:
This is hardly a new point of view for conservative Evangelicals, but most are less brazen about telling a fellow Christian he’s not one, and that God wants him to hate his very nature and spurn his spouse. How does Graham rationalize his bigotry? He blames it on the Bible, to which he takes a spiritually barren, legalistic approach that keeps him from seeing forest or trees because he’s scratching around in the pine straw of cultural conservatism, divinizing the Way Things Used to Be. In this, Graham reminds me of former Georgia congressman and Christian right stalwart Paul Broun Jr.:
Buttigieg, of course, has said to Graham’s religio-political brother-in-arms Mike Pence that when it comes to his sexual orientation: “Your quarrel, sir, is with my creator.” Graham has no problem presuming to reject the work of that creator on grounds that he knows better because of sparse and random condemnations of homosexuality (never by Jesus, it should be noted) in a book whose unmistakable themes are God’s unfailing and unconditional love for all of His creation — and the particularly sinful nature of human self-righteousness.
Next time President Trump has press availability, someone should ask him if he agrees with Graham’s belief that all gay people are depraved and cannot practice Christianity without renouncing their orientation or at least heading back to the closet. Granted, the president knows about as much about religion as he does about the U.S. Constitution. But he should at least accept some responsibility for the hateful views of some of his most fervent supporters — or challenge them to repent.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 24, 2019
What Do Democrats Mean by ‘Electability’?

It’s generally understood that for all the talk of Democrats “moving to the left” and embracing audaciously progressive policies, they are also very concerned about the “electability” of their 2020 presidential nominee. This is a concern that is likely to border on an obsession if the prospective general election looks close as voters begin voting, as I noted last month:
It is sometimes forgotten, though, that different Democrats approach the question of “electability” from very different perspectives. Sure, general-election trial-heat polls offer one way to project the odds of winning with this or that nominee. But early in the nominating contest, they sometimes measure name identification as well as popularity. And as Democrats learned to their eternal sorrow in 2016, polls can get it all wrong, too, even late in the contest.
So barring definitive evidence that a particular candidate is decisively stronger as a Trump opponent than others, what do Democrats (and for that matter media observers) mean by “electability” in the first place? What prejudices do they bring to that discussion?
I would discern five basic ideas about the abilities that equip a candidate to do well in 2020:
This is the oldest idea, and probably the one most often embraced by media folks. Its basis in social science is the median voter theorem — the basic idea of which is that the candidate that puts themselves in the center can win the most votes:
For obvious reasons, the median voter theorem is unpopular among ideologues in both parties who view “the center” as a place where the unprincipled and the timid gravitate. There are also some problems associated with defining “the center” in the first place, as Perry Bacon Jr. has noted:
All sorts of candidates, moreover, can make a plausible claim to represent views within the political “mainstream.” As my colleague Eric Levitz has pointed out, the democratic socialist Bernie Sanders has been careful to identify himself with initiatives that are broadly popular:
Still, the strong tendency in many circles to view “the center” as ideologically moderate is an explicit talking point in the campaigns of Amy Klobuchar and John Hickenlooper, who are reasonably close to the Clinton-Obama “centrist” heritage that won four presidential elections for Democrats since 1992. And it’s certain to be a fundamental argument for Joe Biden’s candidacy as well.
Another prevalent way to judge candidate “electability” is to frame 2020 as essentially a battle over a particular set of crucial swing voters to whom particular candidates do or don’t appeal. Without question, the most popular contestants for key swing voters next year are the Rust Belt white working-class voters — many of whom voted for Barack Obama in 2008 and/or 2012 — who helped Trump win Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, and thus, the presidency in 2016.
Midwestern natives Amy Klobuchar, Pete Buttigieg, and Tim Ryan will talk early and often about their geographical and psychological solidarity with these voters. And Joe Biden’s alleged popularity in this sector will be a big deal for him, too; it’s no accident he is launching his candidacy with multiple events in his native Pennsylvania.
The belief that particular candidates will hurt Democrats among swing voters can become a factor as well. There’s a widespread if often quiet fear that Hillary Clinton’s gender and perceived cultural elitism killed her candidacy in the Rust Belt. This fear could hurt female candidates — particularly from the coasts — in 2020.
For many years there has been a persistent progressive dissent against the median voter theorem holding that on the contrary, Democrats need a more strongly ideological candidate to win an electorate left cold by centrists and the Washington bipartisan “Establishment” they embody. A subset of that dissent is what I’d call the “hidden majority hypothesis,” articulated here by Colin McAuliffe and Sean McElwee:
Another “run to the left” argument is that Democrats need an “insurgent” candidate to counter Trump’s anti-Establishment “drain the swamp” rhetoric while authentically representing the increasingly left-wing views of reliable Democratic voters.
The most powerful evidence for aiming the 2020 Democratic candidacy to the left, of course, is negative: Look what happened to Hillary Clinton. There is some evidence to support the emotionally powerful claim that Sanders would not have lost, sparing the country a Trump presidency.
A theory that sometimes overlaps with the “run to the left” prescription simply holds that 2020 will be a savage turnout battle and Democrats need a candidate whose identity will help mobilize the party base. This approach generally begins with an analysis of disappointing 2016 turnout by African-Americans and Latinos, and the importance of minority voters in states trending Democratic like Arizona, Georgia, and Texas.
This theory offers a particularly strong boost to Kamala Harris, an African/Asian-American woman. But Cory Booker relies on it as well, as does the sole Latino in the field, Julián Castro. It’s unlikely, but if Stacey Abrams were to jump into the race late, it would be significant that she’s devoted most of her career to registering and mobilizing young and minority voters. And speaking of young voters, candidates not named Joe Biden will likely boast of their appeal to Democratic-trending millennials and post-millennials.
There’s one theory of electability that denies ideology or geography or ethnic, gender, and racial identity offer the best Democratic path to victory. It’s all about a candidate’s charisma or “relatability” or likability, as Molly Ball recently suggested:
Arguably Donald Trump won not because of policy positions or money or endorsements, but because he embodies his own sinister brand of charisma, based on an ability to understand and amplify the inchoate fury of white voters who feel threatened or left behind by technological or demographic or cultural change. Some Democrats think they need their own brand of rhetorical enchantment, and are attracted to candidates like Beto O’Rourke and Pete Buttigieg, who offer “narratives” instead of policy papers, and just seem refreshingly likable.
Any successful candidate is going to give off some of that sweet aroma of charm, but maintaining it regularly is tough.
So next time you hear someone boast of this or that candidate’s “electability,” it’s useful to discern what is meant, and which often-unstated premises are involved. It will make everything easier for Democrats if polls in January of 2020 show one candidate beating Trump by 20 points and the rest of them trailing the much-feared demagogue. They probably won’t be that lucky.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 24, 2019
How Biden Plans to Steamroll the 2020 Democratic Field

A few weeks ago, as the ranks of Democrats running for president ballooned, Joe Biden sat down in private with Terry McAuliffe. Both the former vice-president and the former Virginia governor were openly considering joining the field, but McAuliffe had made it clear to his friends and allies atop the party that he’d likely hold off on running if Biden was going to get in. Not only was Biden vastly better known than McAuliffe, he figured, but also, if the Delawarean committed to suitably representing the centrist Democratic perspective, there wouldn’t be much room for the Virginian in the race. The notoriously garrulous pair, who’ve known each other for years, caught up like old pals. By the end of the conversation, Biden had an offer on the table for McAuliffe, a former Democratic National Committee chairman, multiple Democrats briefed on the meeting told New York. I’m almost certainly going to run, Biden said, so lead my money-raising efforts. He wanted McAuliffe — one of politics’ legendary big-money fundraisers, and a close Clinton family friend — to join his campaign in a role akin to finance chairman. McAuliffe, still weeks away from publicly passing on a run of his own, demurred.
But Biden was armed with a phone and something vaguely approximating a plan, and as his launch approached, he was undeterred. While the team of strategists around the former vice-president has spent recent months constructing a political machine that they hope can steamroll over a historically broad primary field, Biden — who’s now scheduled to formally enter the race on Thursday — has been doing what he’s most comfortable doing: catching up with old friends and allies, looking to gather their support for Day One.
The effort has occasionally faltered, including, at times, with prominent would-be supporters — like it did with McAuliffe, who’s not expected to endorse or become involved with any candidate’s campaign anytime soon. When Biden visited with former Senate majority leader Harry Reid in Las Vegas a few months ago, he took the unusual step of directly asking his onetime colleague, the father of the Nevada caucuses, for his endorsement. Reid said no, and made clear he wouldn’t be endorsing anyone at all before his state’s contest — he never does, and Biden would be no exception.
Biden’s push is, in part, ad hoc — “Beto’s going to go around and Instagram his teeth cleaning, Biden’s going to call everyone he knows. That’s just who he is,” says one of his advisers. And it’s a neat example of why those closest to Biden’s pre-campaign have dusted off an old refrain in describing their strategy as they prepare to dive into an unruly race with a hyperfamous candidate who hasn’t run a campaign of his own in over a decade: They’re “just going to let Joe be Joe,” three different Biden allies said to me separately this week.
But Biden’s calls are also part of a real, traditional show-of-force strategy to demonstrate, from his first week in the race, that he is in a category of his own — a pol to be reckoned with this time, complete with more institutional support in the form of endorsements, surrogates, and defenders than all the other candidates combined. “I think you will see a lot of key elected endorsements come out of the chute,” said James Smith, the Biden friend and former South Carolina legislator who ran for governor unsuccessfully in 2018. Biden is wagering that in an age of digital fundraising, insurgent politics, and Trump’s Twitter wars, this kind of thing still matters, especially when he’s likely to be target No. 1 for the rest of the field. Yet in the Biden team’s eyes, it’s only natural: Their guy is in a unique position to approach even the top potential endorsers who are unlikely to weigh in for anyone else and say, “We’ve known each other forever, and I’m your best bet.”
Wary of the perception that Biden has wavered on running (he didn’t exactly expect to be the 21st Democrat in the race), and that his initial fundraising numbers and crowd sizes won’t blow anyone else away, they’ve sought to demonstrate his backing across the country’s most politically powerful precincts. The strategists working to get the campaign off the ground have set up calls and in-person meetings to brief their allies on Capitol Hill, in the states, and in fundraising circles, led by senior aides including Steve Ricchetti and Greg Schultz. And such Biden loyalists have in recent months proactively calmed potential supporters’ nerves whenever other buzzy candidates — Beto! Bernie! Kamala! Pete! — have launched campaigns to significant fanfare, and as rumors flew in recent days about how, exactly, Biden would be kicking off. (A video! Three rallies in a day! A fundraiser! A different video!)
Biden has taken it upon himself to reestablish close contact with party leaders who are likely to play the biggest roles in the early contests ahead, with varying degrees of success. “I would be surprised if Biden doesn’t make an aggressive move for the Establishment,” said Jim Hodges, South Carolina’s last Democratic governor. But Hodges, for one, has made clear to all suitors he has no intention of endorsing anyone anytime soon. A number of unions in Iowa, burned by failed endorsements in last year’s governor’s race, are also expected to stay out of the fray for a while.
Still, Biden speaks regularly with House Majority Whip Jim Clyburn, the South Carolina congressman who’s widely acknowledged as the most influential Democrat in that early-voting state. And he’s remained in close contact with a number of labor leaders he’d like to play important roles in his bid, including AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka, and Harold Schaitberger, who runs the International Association of Fire Fighters union that’s expected to endorse him later this month. Team Biden is expecting this relationship, specifically, to come in handy soon: While most national labor organizations are expected to stay on the sidelines for the foreseeable future given the sheer number of candidates, local firefighter unions are already planning their efforts for the former VP. “We’re absolutely going to be supportive,” said Joe Van Haalen, the president of the Des Moines chapter, previewing what’s likely to be a union-led RV tour of Iowa’s 99 counties on Biden’s behalf.
And, of course, Biden has maintained close touch with a wide range of former Senate colleagues and prominent elected politicians whose endorsements he hopes could provide him with considerable early political clout. He already has at least three senators — Delaware’s Tom Carper and Chris Coons and California’s Dianne Feinstein — on his side, and at least one governor, too: Andrew Cuomo. That’s more than anyone else. Plus, he’s spoken repeatedly with officials around the country down to the city level, like Boston mayor Marty Walsh.
The Biden camp isn’t expecting to roll out dozens of endorsements in one sudden motion when he launches, but the overarching early-days plan to flex his political muscles — a video, a union rally, preplanned endorsements trickling out — is a microcosm of the overall Biden effort to portray himself as far and away the most electable candidate against Donald Trump, especially among a traditional national electorate, and not necessarily, in his advisers’ estimation, the woke Twitter crowd. What Biden will soon find out is whether an effort to highlight institutional support like this is too old school or out of step with today’s Democratic Party. “Does this actually help him? The fact that he has supporters is a core strength,” said one leading Democratic operative who’s in close touch with the Biden team. “But they’re insiders, so it’s a core weakness.”
This, of course, is the existential question Biden’s entire 2020 effort faces. “He is making the same waves he would have in 2016,” lamented one prominent South Carolina Democrat of the expected campaign rollout. Or, in the words of a top Democratic donor who’s been in touch with Biden and his team in the weeks leading up to the launch, upon hearing of yet another Biden call to a potential elected supporter, “That’s so Hillary.”
Gabriel Debenedetti



Apr. 24, 2019
Mueller Report Failed to Move Trump’s Approval Ratings

There was a lot of hope in Republican circles that the “exoneration” the president claimed after his Attorney General William Barr gave a rosy assessment of the Mueller report’s conclusion would give him just the popularity lift he needed going into his reelection campaign. There were even some objective indications that could happen:
And when it turned out the report itself contained very damaging evidence of presidential obstruction of justice, Democrats began to think that perhaps public opinion would turn even further against the 45th president, and there was some evidence of that, too:
But now that there’s more post-Barr, post-Mueller data, it’s looking like the whole brouhaha has for the moment left Trump where he’s mostly been throughout his presidency, with job approval numbers in the low 40s.
At FiveThirtyEight, which maintains the most comprehensive database of polls, Trump’s average approval rating was at 42.1 percent on March 24, the day Barr released his “summary of principal findings.” A week later it was exactly the same. On April 18, when the redacted Mueller report was released, Trump’s average approval rating was 42 percent. FiveThirtyEight reported 14 polls taken (partially or fully) on or after that date. Trump’s average is now at 41.3 percent.
RealClearPolitics’s polling averages don’t include as many polls and don’t adjust the results for partisan bias or survey quality. If only because Rasmussen’s wildly inflated assessments of Trump’s popularity appear regularly, RCP usually shows higher approval averages for the president. But there, too, there’s very little movement. On March 24, Trump’s average approval rating was 43.6 percent. On April 18 it was at 43.9 percent. And now it’s at 43.4 percent.
While it’s always possible there will be some delayed effect of all this favorable and unfavorable news for Trump, it will probably be self-neutralizing. That would leave him in his customary position as an unpopular president who could nonetheless win reelection if he can drag his opponent’s standing down near his own (as he did so successfully in 2016) and then drive his fans to the polls in a hate frenzy that matches or exceeds that of Democrats. It’s worth noting as well that Trump’s amazingly stable approval ratings seem to have been impervious to consistently good economic news, so there’s no particular reason to assume that its continuation will at some point lift him into approval-rating territory he’s never occupied.
The Mueller report did, of course, boost support for impeachment among Democrats, including some presidential candidates. If that sentiment eventually pushes House Democratic leaders to initiate impeachment proceedings, that could have an impact on Trump’s standing, though it’s not entirely clear in which direction it might change. The best odds remain that no matter what happens between now and next year, Trump will remain a dangerously wounded political animal who doesn’t care what damage he does to the country in order to survive.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 24, 2019
With Mueller Gone, the Threat of a Lawless President Is Very Alive

The most revelatory details in Robert Mueller’s largely familiar report concerned the repeated refusal of President Trump’s aides to carry out his most Nixonian demands. It was probably because these details were new that they formed the basis for the narrative that has taken shape around the report: that Trump has behaved irrationally and ineffectually, attempting to abuse his powers without doing any real damage. That conclusion is far too optimistic.
Trump’s attempts to quash the Russia investigation outright may have failed, but his efforts to impede it succeeded. Mueller failed to establish a criminal conspiracy between the Trump campaign and Russia in part because he could not nail down the activities of two Trump advisers: Roger Stone and Paul Manafort. A redacted sentence in the report states, “The investigation was unable to resolve … WikiLeaks’s release of the stolen Podesta emails on October 7, 2016,” it concedes. It likewise failed to establish why Manafort delivered 75 pages of detailed polling analysis to a Russian agent.
Stone and Manafort both declined to cooperate with the investigation. In both cases, Trump sent a combination of public and private messages encouraging both men to stay loyal, and floating the promise of pardons if they did. Of course, we can’t say for certain that their testimony would have proven the conspiracy charge. But at the very least, Trump’s ability to dangle pardons played a crucial role in producing the outcome — no conspiracy charges —that he desired.
A second, underappreciated aspect of Mueller’s probe is that it steered almost totally clear of any counterintelligence issues. The most important question hovering over Trump is not whether he illegally cooperated with Russian hackers, it’s whether Russia gained secret influence over him. That is not a question Mueller’s report sets itself to answer. “The Mueller investigation was a criminal probe,” writes Benjamin Wittes. “Full stop. It was not a counterintelligence probe.”
A few stray clues are lying about. Mueller failed to conclude exactly what Carter Page did during his trip to Moscow, or just how a long-standing target of FBI counterintelligence came into Trump’s orbit to begin with. The report contains a brief, tantalizing reference to one of Michael Cohen’s Russian contacts texting that he “Stopped flow of tapes from Russia but not sure if there’s anything else.” The section implies that Trump had at least some fear, whether justified or not, that the Kremlin possessed incriminating video, but leaves the question open.
The biggest source of leverage is sitting in plain sight. Mueller proved that Trump was chasing a building deal in Moscow that promised to deliver a profit of several hundred million dollars, with no risk on his part. Making a deal like that is not a crime, nor is lying about it, as Trump did. But from a counterintelligence standpoint, having a president secretly in hock to a hostile adversary is a crisis event.
How much additional leverage Russia maintains over the president remains mysterious. His sons have famously conceded in the past that Russia accounts for a huge and disproportionate share of their finding, but Mueller’s report does not divulge any financial information. The House is demanding Trump’s income tax returns — the mildest gesture in the direction of answering this question — but the administration is refusing to hand them over despite the plain-letter text of the law compelling their cooperation.
Notably, administration officials are not ignoring the president’s demands that they defy the law. They are digging in on the tax returns, and likewise refusing to accept subpoenas to testify on a host of additional scandals. The stonewalling includes congressional investigations of security clearances being improperly given to Jared Kushner, Don McGahn’s testimony about Trump’s illegal orders, and Trump’s involvement in his administration’s blocking of the AT&T–Time Warner merger — a move that looks suspiciously like presidential retaliation against CNN for its independent reporting. Trump simply refuses to acknowledge any legitimate oversight role by the putatively coequal branch, and Republicans have closed ranks behind him.
The Mueller report is not a story about how the system worked. It is a story of sweeping misconduct and a cover-up that may have worked. The fear of prosecution caused many of Trump’s lieutenants to shirk their loyalty. But that fear has dissipated now that Mueller has finished his work. And as the task of investigating Trump’s misconduct has passed into the hands of Congress, his party evinces no fear whatsoever in joining the president’s assault on the rule of law.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 24, 2019
Hasan Minhaj Mocks Jared Kushner to His Face Over MBS Friendship

Comedian Hasan Minhaj had the mic for a few minutes at Tuesday night’s Time 100 gala and he used the opportunity to call out Jared Kushner for his close relationship with Saudi crown prince Mohammed bin Salman.
Minhaj, who has a bit of history with MBS, first praised Saudi activist Loujain al-Hathloul, who was put on trial last month for having the gall to drive.
“I know there’s a lot of very powerful people here, and it would be crazy if there was a high-ranking official in the White House that could WhatsApp MBS and say, ‘Hey, maybe you could help that person get out of prison because they don’t deserve it,’” Minhaj said as he appeared to stare at Kushner. “But hey, that person would have to be in the room. It’s just a good comedy premise.”
Earlier this year, Minhaj offended the Saudi government by spending an episode of his Netflix show Patriot Act tearing into MBS over the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. When the government complained, Netflix stopped streaming the episode in the country. Minhaj would later thank the kingdom for making him go viral. “For the first time in my life, I was a bipartisan icon,” he said. “Liberals and conservatives: They both embraced me like I was money from Big Pharma.”
Adam K. Raymond



Apr. 24, 2019
Broward County Deputies Assaulted a Black Teen. But ‘Accountability’ Is Not Enough.

The sheriff’s office in Broward County, Florida, has promised to investigate two of its deputies for assaulting a black 15 year old on Thursday. An 18-second video shows the officials — Christopher Krickovich and Sergeant Greg LaCerra — pepper-spraying the teen in the face, banging his forehead against concrete, and punching him on the side of his head. (The teen’s name has not been disclosed in news reports, but he has been identified on social media as “Lucca.”) Footage of the incident has circulated nationally, prompting outraged responses from celebrities and lawmakers alike. Sheriff Gregory Tony tried to assuage the concerns of local black civic leaders by vowing a “tactful” investigation. “That’s the most electrifying and dangerous situation for a law enforcement administrator to handle,” Tony, the county’s first black sheriff, said on Saturday, according to the South Florida Sun Sentinel. “Any time a white deputy is involved in contact with using force on a black youth, this thing blows up.”
That such a thing might “blow up” is appropriate. Years of activism and reporting have demonstrated the racism with which law enforcement is applied across the United States. In Broward County, its impact on black youth has been a point of special focus. A 2013 initiative led by Robert Runcie, superintendent of Broward County Public Schools, sought to eliminate disparities in the rates at which black students were suspended and arrested for in-school misconduct compared to their white peers. (During the 2011-2012 school year, black students were roughly two-thirds of those suspended, mostly for minor incidents — like using profanity or disrupting class — despite being 40 percent of the student body, according to the American Prospect.) Runcie partnered with local advocates and law enforcement to implement alternatives to suspension and prohibit arrests — 71 percent of which were for misdemeanors — in some cases where they had been allowed before. (Officers were, however, allowed to override some of these prohibitions: “I wanted to make sure deputies always had discretion,” then-Sheriff Scott Israel told the Prospect.)
The effect was almost immediate. By the end of 2013, suspensions had dropped 40 percent and arrests of students had fallen 66 percent. A more humane tint began to color how local law enforcement treated black children for whom youthful mistakes often meant years of condemnation as criminals. But Thursday’s incident proves that progress on one front does not constitute a sea change any more than it precludes regression. After 19-year-old Nikolas Cruz killed 17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School last February, criticism of how Broward County Sheriff’s deputies handled the shooting — including their failure to immediately enter the school when gunshots were reported — prompted an emphasis on meeting perceived threats with swift violence, according to the Washington Post. Deputies have since been re-trained on how to subdue subjects in what one sheriff’s union official described to the Post as a “Fight Club atmosphere.” Some participants have suffered injuries in the process, ranging from fractured bones to a detached retina to brain bleeding.
So when dispatchers on Thursday received calls that a group of teenagers had gathered in a McDonald’s parking lot in Tamarac — a popular hangout for local high schoolers — and that some of them were fighting, they applied the kind of immediate and decisive force that many wished they had wielded against Cruz. Among the differences was that such force is used traditionally against black youth with no such justification — as examples ranging from the 2015 police assault on a black girl in Richland County, South Carolina, to the February police beating of a black girl in Chicago illustrate. For these victims, the misapplication of brutal police training was their lot well before Parkland. That the 15 year old on Thursday committed no clear infraction, let alone a crime, highlights the absurdity of continuing to apply it after. In effect, the training changes in Broward County seek to level against men like Cruz a degree of violence that, for many unarmed black children, was already a danger. Such are the wages of a culture that looks to atrocities like Parkland to shape law enforcement policy, but seems unable or unwilling to ensure that officers do not greet innocent people with the same violence.
Accordingly, Krickovich, who wrote the police report about Thursday’s incident, seemed to inflate Thursday’s threat to justify his response. In his telling, he was arresting another teen for trespassing when Lucca bent down to pick up the boy’s cell phone. “While I was dealing with the male on the ground, I observed his phone slide to the right of me and then behind me,” Krickovich wrote, according to the Sun Sentinel. “I observed a teen [Lucca] wearing a red tank top reach down and attempt to grab the male student’s phone.” In the video, another deputy — identified by the Sun Sentinel as LaCerra — is seen shoving Lucca, after which Lucca appears to object verbally. In the report, Krickovich wrote that Lucca “took an aggressive stance” toward LaCerra, “bladed his body and began clenching his fists.” (The video shows no such clear aggression.) LaCerra then pepper-sprayed Lucca in the face and threw him to the ground. Claiming that he feared for his safety, Krickovich “jumped on [Lucca],” grabbed the prone teen by both sides of his head, slammed his forehead against the concrete, and punched him before another deputy helped him apply handcuffs.
Whether the deputies were actually afraid is less knowable — and arguably less telling — than their confidence that claiming they were would exonerate them of wrongdoing. Racism shapes this expectation. Outlandish scenarios arise from police accounts of the dangers that young black men allegedly pose. Officer Darren Wilson equated Michael Brown to a “demon” during his testimony about the 2014 shooting in Ferguson, Missouri, that sparked protests and riots. “[He] had the most intense, aggressive face,” Wilson told a grand jury. “The only way I can describe it, it looks like a demon.” If one accepts that Brown was “like a demon,” claims that he barreled toward a police officer through a hail of bullets become palatable. (No criminal charges were filed against Wilson.) If one concedes that Lucca was similarly endowed, assertions that the unarmed teen posed a threat to gun-toting sheriff’s deputies — despite video evidence to the contrary — is plausible enough for Krickovich to gamble on investigators siding with him.
In a sense, Thursday was a predictable outcome of asking an institution whose job is violence to escalate. Lucca and Cruz — or Lucca and anyone who seeks to harm police officers, really — exist on polar ends of most realistic threat spectra, but separating them is of secondary concern to those convinced that safety means reflexively treating more people like the latter. Krickovich banked on this ambiguity. Racism likely helped rationalize his response, despite it transpiring in a community whose administrators, in the past, sought to reduce disparities. Indeed, it is hard to believe that he and LaCerra would have treated a white child the same way they did Lucca. But when an assault like Thursday’s is permissible as long as officers claim they are afraid — and can convince investigators that their response was consistent with what others would have done in their place — then the bigger issue is more fundamental than whether they were white and the victim black. The problem, one of many, is the public and institutional instinct to let the worst set the standard rather than remain outliers. Humane rules of engagement evaporate where every suspect is a demon. And whatever the outcome of the department’s investigation, it is worth asking if that is a reasonable price to pay for feeling safe.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 24, 2019
Trump Says He Has ‘No Reason’ to Cooperate With House Democrats

As if the president’s contempt of House Democrats’ regulatory power wasn’t apparent enough, in a Tuesday interview with the Washington Post Trump said that he has “no reason” to cooperate with Congressional investigations into his campaign’s contacts with Russia after the release of the Mueller report. “There is no reason to go any further and especially in Congress where it’s very partisan — obviously very partisan,” Trump said.
The president’s comments came after two White House officials announced that the administration would fight a subpoena issued by the House Judiciary for ex-White House counsel Don McGahn. The redacted Mueller report released last week contained several new exchanges between the president and his former lawyer, including two instances in which McGahn told investigators that Trump directed him to fire the special counsel. The White House will attempt to block the McGahn subpoena by “asserting executive privilege over his testimony,” according to the Washington Post.
Trump also told the Post that he had not made a “final, final decision” about the use of executive privilege to block McGahn’s testimony. But it sounds like the plan is a go, judging from the Post’s reporting on White House lawyers’ “plan to tell attorneys for administration witnesses called by the House that they will be asserting executive privilege over their testimony.”
The plan, like so many emitting from the White House, may not be thoroughly thought out. “It seems to me executive privilege was waived when McGahn was permitted to give testimony and to be interviewed by special counsel Mueller,” former Watergate prosecutor Richard Ben-Veniste told the Post. “I don’t see how the White House can assert executive privilege with something that has already been revealed. To use the Watergate expression, ‘You can’t put the toothpaste back in the tube.’”
Elsewhere this week, the Trump administration defied House Democrats requests to hand over the president’s tax returns, and directed former White House personnel security director Carl Kline to ignore a subpoena from the House Oversight Committee, resulting in a contempt of Congress charge for Kline. In this context, it appears that Trump’s open admission that he intends to stymie Congress wasn’t given with controversial intent — at this point, denying the House its regulatory purview is just White House operating procedure.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 23, 2019
Steve King Has ‘Better Insight’ on Christ’s Suffering After House Rebuke Over White Nationalism

Iowa representative and far-right sympathizer Steve King has kept a fairly low profile since the House cut him from his positions on the Judiciary and Agricultural committees for claiming the label “white nationalist” is not offensive. “White nationalist, white supremacist, Western civilization — how did that language become offensive?” King asked in a January interview with the New York Times.
But the Tuesday after Easter, King returned to the spotlight with an apparent savior complex. At a town-hall meeting in Cherokee, Iowa, King described the experience of being on the receiving end of a 421-1 House vote to rebuke him for his statement to the Times: “When I have to step down to the floor of the House of Representatives, and look up at those 400-and-some accusers, you know we just passed through Easter and Christ’s passion, and I have better insight into what He went through for us.”
King’s claim — My experience of getting reprimanded in an organized fashion for normalizing white nationalism is similar to crucifixion — comes at a moment for the American right that New York’s Ed Kilgore calls conservative Christian self-pity: frustration “over the indignity of having to share their country with sodomites, feminists, and environmentalists, not to mention the active persecution associated with having to subsidize reproductive medical services, cater to the patronage of same-sex couples, and worst of all, experience wishes for ‘Happy Holidays’ every Christmas season.”
At the town hall in Iowa, a local reverend, Pinky Person, forwarded a similar claim: “My concern is how Christianity is really being persecuted. It is starting right here in the United States.” As shown by the grim example of the Easter bombings that killed 359 Sri Lankans, horrific violence against Christians is a phenomenon taking place abroad: According to Open Doors, the most extensive anti-Christian persecution is in Pakistan, Nigeria, and the Central African Republic. However, Iowa, where Christians make up a reported 77 percent of the population, didn’t make the cut.
Correction: This post initially said King was censured by Congress. The House voted to repudiate King’s words, but the push to censure him – a more serious punishment – fizzled. We regret the error. 
Matt Stieb



Apr. 23, 2019
Washington State Democrats Are Calling on the GOP to Remove an Extremist From Its Ranks

At various points in his strange career, State Representative Matt Shea of Washington’s Spokane Valley has called for a holy war on liberals, advocated for eastern Washington to secede from the union, and spoken to meetings of the John Birch Society. Now, despite a new report that details his participation in a disturbing far-right group chat, Shea, a Republican, is clinging to power. His party seems reluctant to condemn him.
Shea’s most recent public-relations crisis unfolded on Saturday. The Guardian’s Jason Wilson published texts sent by Shea and two other men, whom Wilson identified as far-right radio host Jack Robertson and Anthony Bosworth, who helped occupy the Malheur wildlife refuge in 2016. In the texts, which date from 2017, Shea appears to offer material assistance to Robertson and Bosworth, who believed a left-wing uprising was imminent and proposed a violent response. “Ok. What BG checks need to be done. Give me the list,” he wrote. Robertson and Bosworth offered more threatening contributions. “Fist full of hair, and face slam, to a Jersey barrier. Treat em like communist revolutionaries. Then shave her bald with a K-Bar USMC field knife,” Robertson wrote. Robertson told the Guardian that his comments were “tongue-in-cheek.”
Though Shea did not make threats in the chats, his participation, and his apparent offer to run background checks on local left-wing activists, swiftly earned him a round of political condemnation. The state Democratic Party has called on the GOP to boot Shea from its ranks. But in a statement, Republican House Minority Leader JT Wilcox stopped short of calling for Shea’s resignation or even for his censure.
That’s troubling, and not just because of Shea’s offer to surveil left-wing activists. His extremism is old news in Washington, and the Republican Party seems to ignore his trespasses until unfavorable press coverage occasionally forces its hand.
The lawmaker, who volunteered as a pro-bono attorney for the right-wing Alliance Defending Freedom, first ran for office on a family-values platform in 2008. But his ex-wife has accused him of domestic violence. In divorce filings reported by the Spokane Spokesman-Review at the time, Lisa Shea said that her husband “insisted she walk on his left side because his sword, if he had one, would be on his right side.” According to the same story, her brother-in-law testified that Shea berated his wife, grabbed her violently by the arm, and once pushed her into a vehicle.
Nevertheless, voters elected Shea to office and kept him there. In the meantime, the lawmaker’s official Facebook page became a wonderland of conspiratorial nonsense. In one public post, he links to a blog that warns of an approaching “grand solar minimum”; this theory purportedly disproves the reality of climate change. In other posts, he links to his own podcast, where he’s interviewed luminaries like Larry Klayman, the far-right activist behind JudicialWatch; Jerome Corsi, an infamous Obama birther who once speculated that Antonin Scalia was murdered on a pedophile ranch; and Tom DeWeese, who promotes the Agenda 21 conspiracy theory about a looming United Nations takeover of the United States.
But Shea’s far-right views didn’t block his ascent within the state GOP. He even served as the chair of the Republican caucus, and only lost the position in 2018, after press reports linked him to a four-page manifesto that outlined a literal war on liberals. “If they do not yield, kill all males,” he wrote. Who knows what he’d planned for the women. The Guardian reports that after the manifesto became public knowledge, Shea did lose donors in addition to his removal as chair of the party’s caucus, but he won reelection anyway.
Shea admitted authorship of the manifesto, but defended it as a “summary” of sermons about the basis for biblical war. He sounds similarly unrepentant now. On Tuesday, the Seattle Times reported that Shea had written a lengthy public Facebook post that called the Guardian’s story a “hit piece.”
“Of course I have done background checks to protect my family and my community, but that was only in response to threats already coming from the left,” he wrote. “I will continue to fight to protect the Constitution, my family, and my community. I will not back down. I will not quit. I will not give in. Ever.” If state Republicans don’t intend to hold him accountable in some substantive fashion, it’s hard to see why he’d have to give in to anyone, about anything, at all.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 23, 2019
Joe Biden Reportedly Pushes Campaign Announcement to Thursday

On Wednesday, former vice-president Joe Biden was expected to announce his candidacy for president with a video shot in his hometown of Scranton, followed by a rally in either Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, or Charlottesville, Virginia. But according to Edward-Isaac Dovere, the Atlantic reporter who initially broke the details of Biden’s announcement, the campaign kick-off may be delayed.
The Philadelphia Inquirer also reported on Monday that Biden would not be traveling to Charlottesville on Wednesday, and that “considerations” involving the sites in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh had been “scuttled.”
“Things are fluid,” a Biden adviser told Time on Friday. Despite that fluidity, Biden is still accepting campaign donations prior to his reportedly pushed-back announcement.
On Tuesday, the Washington Post reported that Biden now intends to announce his candidacy by video on Thursday, with a trip to Pittsburgh following on Monday.
In candid remarks to Time on Friday, a former Biden aide said there’s plenty of chaos behind the scenes: “I’ve never seen anything so half-assed. They’re improvising and doing last-minute planning. The guy has been running for president since 1987 and can’t figure the basics out, like where to stand on his first day? This should make everyone very nervous.”
Politico reports that Biden could announce on Thursday, while noting that the timing is still “in flux.” The report also describes a “battle plan” for the former veep, whose campaign intends to secure key union endorsements, like the International Association of Firefighters, and to rely on Biden’s support from the party Establishment.
Despite allegations of unwanted physical contact, Biden has led the Democratic field throughout most of the primary race’s early months — he’s leading with 30 percent in the most current Morning Consult poll, six points ahead of the next contender, Bernie Sanders. But another Biden insider who spoke to Time expects that Biden’s lead during his non-campaign will be harder to maintain post-announcement: “This guy’s best day is the day he announces. Everything after that gets worse.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 23, 2019
Strong Midterm Turnout Should Continue in 2020

As you have probably heard, voter turnout in the 2018 midterm elections was by historical standards very high — higher than in any midterm since 1914, as a matter of fact. Since turnout in the previous midterm, in 2014, was the lowest since 1942, it was quite the turnaround. Recently compiled Census data are making the dimensions of the 2018 spike clearer, as the Washington Post explains:
Other elements of the electorate that are trending Democratic also turned out at robust rates not often seen in midterms:
Turnout is invariably larger in presidential than in midterm elections — and, relatively speaking, is usually higher in the former than in the latter among pro-Democratic demographics. That augurs well for total turnout in 2020 and for a continued Democratic edge, all other things being equal.
Another straw in the wind in turnout figures was explained recently in an analysis by Michael McDonald’s U.S. Elections Project and Nonprofit VOTE.
With Trump himself on the ballot, any boost he provided to midterm turnout should continue, if not intensify, in 2020.
But as the same report showed, another factor that apparently helped improve turnout in 2018 should do the same in 2020 — the steady spread of reforms making it easier to register to vote and to cast votes from home:
Census data show that early voting from home (i.e., by mail) or in person at early polling places has been increasing steadily; it has more than doubled since 2006, from 19.5 percent of the vote to 39.8 percent in 2018. Again, it’s unlikely that fewer states will make these opportunities available in 2020, so the upward trajectory in turnout may continue.
All of these considerations are separate from the effect of both parties and the news media beating on voters with big sticks to convince them that the 2018 and 2020 elections matter more than any in living memory. Since that has the added virtue of probably being true, 2020 should see spectacular turnout.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 23, 2019
Netanyahu Wants to Name a Golan Heights Settlement After Trump

In late March, President Trump did Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu a solid by recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over the strategically valuable Golan Heights, an area the state has occupied since the Six-Day War of 1967. By acknowledging Israeli authority in the contentious region annexed from Syria, critics claim that Trump effectively campaigned for Netanyahu in the April 9 election, helping the prime minister secure support on the nation’s right after the Israeli attorney general announced in February that he intended to indict Netanyahu on bribery and corruption charges.
Netanyahu — aware that, for Trump, seeing his name on a residential complex is one of the great joys in life — announced on Tuesday that he intended to pay him back for his support by requesting that a new Jewish settlement in the Golan Heights be named after the American president. “All Israelis were deeply moved when President Trump made his historic decision to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the Golan Heights,” Netanyahu said in a video recorded during a Passover visit to the region with his family. “Therefore, after the Passover holiday, I intend to bring to the government a resolution calling for a new community on the Golan Heights named after President Donald J. Trump.”
Currently, around 50,000 people live in the area: Jewish settlers are about half of that, with Druze Arabs with Syrian roots making up the rest of the population. As the New York Times notes, over 30 Jewish settlements have been built in the Golan Heights since the ’67 war. Israel intends to settle the region heavily in the next few decades: By 2048, the state intends to build housing that would accommodate 250,000 Israelis.
Within this new occupation boom, if Netanyahu’s government accepts his proposal, some Israeli settlers will live in buildings where the gilded Trump name adorns their residential complexes. Of course, if Netanyahu really wants to honor the American president, he could construct the Trump Golan settlements in the style of the Queens real-estate magnate — by building them poorly, ripping off contractors, or excluding minorities from living in them.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 23, 2019
Warren’s Impeachment Gambit Could Work Out Well for Her

Last week Elizabeth Warren became the first major 2020 Democratic presidential candidate to leap squarely onto the bullet train of a call for Trump’s impeachment:
At the time, I thought her action might cancel out its strategic value for her by beginning an avalanche of other candidates moving in the same direction:
But that hasn’t really happened. Yes, one major rival, Senator Kamala Harris, took the same leap last night, as the Cut’s Amanda Arnold noted:
It didn’t get much attention, but Seth Moulton came out for impeachment today. Others have inched in that direction. Julián Castro said impeachment would be “perfectly reasonable” post-Mueller, even before Warren’s announcement. Pete Buttigieg says Trump deserved to be impeached, but left it up to Congress to decide whether to go in that direction. Cory Booker, Kirsten Gillibrand, and John Hickenlooper are basically saying impeachment is premature but may eventually prove necessary. Amy Klobuchar cites the possibility that she might serve as a “juror” in a Senate impeachment trial as grounds for refusing to comment on its advisability.
Several candidates are still pretty negative on the whole impeachment proposition. One of them is co-front-runner Bernie Sanders, who said this at a town hall session last night:
Beto O’Rourke thinks impeachment might take too long to take down Trump. Joe Biden hasn’t been pinned down on the subject, but if he announces his candidacy this week as planned, he’ll have to formulate a position.
If the candidates more or less stand by their current positions (or lack thereof) on impeachment, the impact on the race may largely depend on what happens in the U.S. House. If House leaders succumb to impeachment fever at some near point in the future, Warren (and to a lesser extent Harris) may get credit for getting out in front of the parade, and the candidates who held back may lose some Fighting Progressive street cred. If the House does not take the fateful step, then impeachment could become a serious issue in the nominating contest itself, particularly among voters and activists who become angry about Congress’s inaction. In that case, pressure on the field to follow Warren will intensify. It would create a particularly interesting challenge for Bernie Sanders, currently one of the more adamantly anti-impeachment candidates. Warren is already rolling out enough audacious policy proposals to threaten Sanders’s left flank. If she’s vocally for impeachment and he’s vocally opposed, it could begin to matter to voters, particularly those who think failing to pursue impeachment represents the kind of cowardice for which people like Bernie used to criticize the party Establishment.
All in all, Warren’s impeachment gambit could work out well for a candidate who was perceived as struggling not that very long ago.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 23, 2019
Texas Senator John Cornyn’s Path to Reelection Just Got Tougher

One of the Senate’s more vulnerable Republicans will face a familiar Democratic challenger in 2020. MJ Hegar, an Air Force veteran who lost a congressional race to John Carter in 2018, announced on Tuesday that she intends to challenge Texas senator John Cornyn for his Senate seat.
“Texans deserve a senator who represents our values, strength, courage, independence — putting Texas first,” she said in a campaign announcement reported by the Texas Tribune. “I didn’t get a pilot slot my first time trying. We Texans don’t give up easy, and everything we’ve accomplished is just the beginning.”
Hegar lost to Carter by three points, a narrow margin reminiscent of another Texas Democrat’s long-shot bid against an incumbent Republican. While Beto O’Rourke tries to spin his near-victory over Ted Cruz into a viable campaign for president, Hegar has decided to explore her chances a bit closer to home.
For Texas Democrats, the Republican senator is a tempting target. Though he has a lot of cash to spend, a February poll from Quinnipiac University points out possible weaknesses. Cornyn is less popular than his fellow Texas senator, Ted Cruz. He’s also a less polarizing figure — the same poll showed that while fewer Texans approved of Cornyn’s job performance, his disapproval ratings were lower than Cruz’s — but that might not be enough to protect his seat. Democrats flipped two congressional seats and 12 state House seats last November; Texas is more competitive for Democrats than it has been in years.
Hegar, with her strong showing against Carter, could prove to be a serious contender for Cornyn’s seat. Her recent campaign increased her visibility, thanks in part to viral campaign ads that emphasized her military background and her decision to sue the Pentagon for blocking women from entering ground combat positions. (Hegar won.)
But Hegar will have competition, too. The Dallas Morning News reports that a handful of lower-profile Democratic candidates have already launched campaigns against the senator. And she probably won’t be the last Democrat to announce a campaign against Cornyn, either. Joaquin Castro, who represents the state’s 20th Congressional District and is the twin brother of presidential candidate Julián Castro, has also expressed interest in the race. In comments to the Morning News, he did not rule out a future campaign. If he does enter the race, he’ll have an edge over Hegar, who hasn’t held office and whose actual policy positions remain somewhat opaque. Asked directly by Refinery29 for a position on gun control after the Parkland shooting, Hegar, then a congressional candidate, told the website only that “gun violence is the ‘greatest threat’ to the Second Amendment and that she is ‘passionately committed’ to legislating away the gun violence epidemic.”
Hegar may hope that her moderate approach will be an appealing contrast to Cornyn, who’s fashioned himself a close ally of President Trump. Next year, we’ll find out if she’s right.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 23, 2019
Supreme Court Telegraphs Approval for Adding Citizenship Question to Census

Normally, Supreme Court–watchers are reticent about predicting decisions from oral arguments, particularly in complicated cases that are expected to divide the Court. But it seems that just about everyone who listened to today’s arguments in Department of Commerce v. New York, the case involving the Trump administration’s efforts to place a citizenship question in the 2020 Census, came away with a clear impression.
Howe often writes for the authoritative SCOTUSblog, and isn’t one to jump to conclusions.
Perhaps the best-known Supreme Court commentator is NPR’s Nina Totenberg. She expressed no major doubts either:
Add the New York Times’ Adam Liptak to the chorus:
The first analyses beyond Twitter reached the same conclusion, like this one from the Los Angeles Times’ David Savage:
The Court has been asked to assess both statutory and constitutional challenges (brought by a variety of states, cities, and civil-rights groups) to the Commerce Department’s decision to bring back a general citizenship question that hasn’t been used since 1950. Three district courts (in California, Maryland, and New York) ruled that Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross’s rationale and procedures for this step violated the Administrative Procedures Act and the Census Act. (A California district court ruled in favor of a parallel challenge based on the argument that the administration’s approach violated a constitutional requirement for an exact “enumeration” of the population via the Census, and SCOTUS agreed to review that decision as well.)
At the administration’s request, SCOTUS took up this case on an expedited basis without the usual Court of Appeals review because of a June deadline for preparation of 2020 Census questions.
The administration’s main argument against claims that its decision to include a citizenship question is “arbitrary and capricious” (violating the APA) and fails to use the best available techniques for actually measuring the population (violating the Census Act) is that it needs citizenship information in order to enforce compliance with the Voting Right Act. Aside from the risibility of the idea that Team Trump is interested in doing anything to the VRA other than gutting it or repealing it, there’s no indication that Ross mentioned this rationale in making his decision.
The VRA argument appears to have been tacked on later by Justice Department litigators preparing for judicial review. Indeed, as Liptak notes, the record shows a rationale far from VRA:
But the administration’s even more fundamental effort is to convince SCOTUS that it has broad authority to prepare the Census as it sees fit, as Amy Howe explained in her preview of the case:
It is deference to the Executive branch, an emerging motif of the Roberts Court in the Trump era, that Court-watchers seem to be picking up on. Both of Trump’s SCOTUS appointees, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh (who with Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito form the conservative bloc on the high court), treated citizenship inquiries as unremarkable in their questions during the oral arguments.
If the decision goes the way it appears to be going, the consequences could be massive. The administration’s own estimates show that as many as 6.5 million people — many of them recent immigrants fearful of arrest and/or deportation if they become visible — won’t answer the Census at all if there is a citizenship question. Since federal funding formulas typically depend on Census figures, states with serious undercounts will get screwed to the tune of many billions of dollars. Congressional and state legislative reapportionment and redistricting are also based on Census figures; California could lose congressional seats and electoral votes, and areas with sizable immigrant populations within a variety of states could lose clout in Congress and in state legislatures.
Because of the timing, a SCOTUS rubber stamp in this scenario would be definitive. So even if Trump loses in 2020, the legacy of this action would live on for another decade, until the next Census. Consider it a nasty little time bomb from Donald J. Trump, and a further indication how important partisan control of SCOTUS appointments have become.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 23, 2019
Biden’s Shock-and-Awe Strategy for 2020 Race Smells Like Jeb’s in 2016

While reading a Politico piece on Joe Biden’s plans for entry into the 2020 presidential contest I felt a strong sense of déjà vu. Passages like this felt familiar:
Then it all came back to me: A “show of force” launch was the beginning of a long trail down to oblivion for another early front-runner facing a large field of rivals: 2016 Republican candidate Jeb Bush, whose initial strategy was described by the selfsame Politico as “shock and awe”:
Political pros were wowed by Jeb’s combination of money, endorsements, and staff. He seemed to embody the party Establishment that we had been reliably told actually controlled nominations, regardless of the noisy pretensions of ideologues, demagogues, and activists. It made sense, but it failed spectacularly, as Bush’s supposed strategic genius Mike Murphy later admitted:
Could Biden be making the same mistake in trying to consolidate his position as the best-known, “safest” candidate in a field full of brighter and shinier objects?
It’s certainly a risk the former veep and his people should weigh and then minimize. Like Jeb Bush, Biden has a record of identification with past party Establishment orthodoxies that have come into considerable disrepute with his own party’s base. For Bush it was comprehensive immigration reform, NAFTA, and the Iraq War; for Biden it’s triangulating opposition to “busing,” harsh mandatory-minimum legislation, coziness with the financial sector — and yes, the Iraq War too. The Democrat may not be “low energy” like Bush, but he’s got his own character-based Achilles’ heel in his “handsiness,” and a potential age problem as well.
The Bush–Biden comparisons don’t always match up. Jeb was never very popular among the Republican rank and file. According to Gallup his favorability ratio with Republican voters was a decent but not dazzling 54/27 in July of 2015. Today, Morning Consult shows Biden with a much stronger 75/14. Bush also wasn’t as strong in horse-race polls as early on as Biden is today, though a March 2015 ABC/WaPo poll did show him with a solid lead over the rest of the huge field with 21 percent.
It’s also unclear if anyone in the 2020 Democratic field can serve as a Biden nemesis as effectively as Trump did in exposing every Bush vulnerability in 2016.
But if progressive media and Biden’s rivals do steadily work at increasing “base” voter awareness of Uncle Joe’s personal and ideological weaknesses, he, too, could lost altitude. By the time voters started voting in 2016, Bush’s favorability ration among Republicans was actually underwater, and suddenly all of his money and endorsements became all but worthless.
One asset Biden does have that Bush lacked is a partywide obsession with candidate “electability” that could make him acceptable to voters and activists who might normally turn elsewhere.
But the meta-problem for Biden that the Bush precedent raises is that as time goes on he will simply look like a has-been from an increasingly irrelevant past era of American politics — one that has been revolutionized by Jeb’s vanquisher, Donald Trump. If that happens to Biden, his presumed “electability” advantage could fly out the window quickly.
He might be smart to place less emphasis on wowing Beltway observers with his money and endorsements, and more on mixing things up with unexpected and interesting policy proposals and campaign rhetoric that makes him part of the Democratic Party’s future rather than its past. Jeb Bush should offer Biden a constant cautionary tale.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 23, 2019
After Smearing of Obama, Democrats Should Know How to Defend Ilhan Omar

Barack Obama did not attend a madrassa as a child. He did not, as a Fox News host claimed in 2013, “pay out of his own pocket for the Museum of Muslim Cultures” during a government shutdown. He did not have ties to the Muslim Brotherhood. He was not a terrorist sympathizer. But for eight years, the right-wing rumor mills insisted to all and sundry that Obama — whose middle name was Hussein, whose father was a Muslim — must also be Muslim and therefore, a extremist. “Obama was enrolled in a Wahabi school in Jakarta. Wahabism is the RADICAL teaching that is followed by the Muslim terrorists who are now waging Jihad against the western world,” claimed one chain email, quoted by Politifact.
To the right wing, Obama’s fictional Muslim faith worked as a stand-in for radicalism, for criminality — in short, for his race. Obama could not have been born in the U.S., these voters assumed. He must instead be an interloper, maybe even a Manchurian candidate, foisted on the American people to destroy free markets and the nation’s moral character. When conservatives did acknowledge Obama’s real, Christian faith, they often denigrated it or dismissed its existence altogether. Obama could not even attend church properly. He distanced himself from his pastor, Jeremiah Wright, after ABC News published clips of Wright’s anguished sermons on the virulent character of American racism; Wright’s outcry, “God damn America,” was translated by the right not as a proportionate reaction to centuries of violent oppression but as proof of his famous parishioner’s disloyalty to the United States.
After eight years of the Obama presidency, Democrats should be very good at identifying a baseless smear campaign when they see one. The skills they should have honed under Obama would be crucial now, with prolific liar Donald Trump in office. Relentless fact-checking won’t end Trumpism’s hold on America, but the president’s political opponents ought to at least be able to discern between truth and fiction. Instead, it’s not clear what, if anything, the party’s leaders learned from its Obama-era battles. Faced with a smear campaign against one of its newest congresswomen, the party has stumbled repeatedly.
There’s a clear link between the treatment Obama received as president and the harassment Representative Ilhan Omar undergoes now. Unlike Obama, Omar is Muslim and a hijabi at that; unlike Obama, she was born in an African country. She is even to Obama’s left. The Affordable Care Act never qualified as a socialist policy, despite right-wing claims to the contrary, but Medicare for All, which Omar supports, might fit that description. She is nearly everything the right wing feared Obama would be, and she has borne the cost.
The right wing has again swung into position, with Omar as its principal target. The freshman lawmaker from Minnesota has been painted as an anti-Semite who harbors a secret hatred of the United States. To make the case against Omar, conservatives — with an assist from some liberals — accused the lawmaker of repeating anti-Semitic tropes in a February tweet that criticized AIPAC’s influence in Washington. Omar apologized, saying “my intention is never to offend my constituents or Jewish Americans as a whole.” But a few weeks after that furor subsided, conservative commentators and elected Republicans accused her of trivializing 9/11 in a speech. Trump joined in, tweeting a video that spliced Omar’s remarks with footage from the attacks. Their central complaint — that Omar had said of 9/11, “some people did something” — is inaccurate. Omar was speaking broadly, making a distinction between the 9/11 attackers and the rest of the Muslim world, as Tom Scocca pointed out at HmmDaily. Yet that did not prevent the New York Times’ Bret Stephens from publishing a column that chewed up Omar’s remarks and spat them back out in unrecognizable order; “some people did something” became “something someone did.” Mischaracterizations of Omar’s remarks resemble complaints from Trump and others on the right that Obama — and Hillary Clinton — refused to say the simple words “radical Islamic terrorism.” The implication is that Omar is soft on terror. After all, the 9/11 attackers were Muslim, and so is she. Was she afraid to mention that? Really makes you think.
Meanwhile, the death threats pour in. On Friday, Florida authorities arrested a professed Trump supporter who left threatening voicemails for Senator Cory Booker, Representative Eric Swalwell, and Representative Rashida Tlaib, who, like Omar, is Muslim. Talking Points Memo reports that the man threatened to kill Ilhan Omar in each of the voicemails. Omar had already said that she “experienced an increase in direct threats on my life” after Trump tweeted that edited video of her 9/11 remarks, and earlier this month, police arrested a Western New York man for threatening to shoot Omar, who he’d called a terrorist.
Omar needs the support of her party, and she’s received it from some members. Tlaib and other left-wing freshman Democrats issued strongly worded statements of support, as did most of the party’s presidential candidates. But after Trump tweeted his edited Omar video, other Democrats dithered. In a tweet, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand offered support for the congresswoman but said that as a senator who represents 9/11 victims, she can not “accept any minimizing of that pain.” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi offered what HuffPost called a “lukewarm” response to Trump’s video, which did not refer to Omar by name. She issued another, more strenuous condemnation of the video days later, saying that her party has “no taint” of anti-Semitism. “I don’t think that the congresswoman is anti-Semitic. I wouldn’t even put those in the same category,” she told CNN. Steny Hoyer, the House Majority Leader, has remained silent on the subject of Omar since March, when he attacked her in a speech to AIPAC.
Representative Lucy McBath returned a campaign donation from Omar. So did Dan McCready, a candidate for office in North Carolina’s Ninth Congressional District, after one of his Republican challengers attacked him for taking Omar’s money. In explanatory tweets, McCready tried to split the difference. He hates anti-Semitism and Islamophobia, he said:
McCready’s explanation might be coherent if Omar was anti-Semitic. She isn’t, as Pelosi has now noted. But it’s startling and disturbing that so many other Democrats will not call a smear a smear. Islamophobia “is still very present on both sides of the aisle,” Rashida Tlaib told CNN in March. This is not an image the Democratic Party — which has been touting the historic diversity of its freshman class — wants for itself. But the party cannot escape its history. Many of its members have backed violent interventions in majority-Muslim countries. Most still profess support for an increasingly far-right and oppressive Israeli government. These tendencies still haunt the party, even as it begins to diversify. Obama wasn’t a Muslim, after all; maybe this made him easier for Democrats to defend.
But Omar isn’t going anywhere, and neither are American Muslims. On the subject of Omar, and the smears that endanger her life, Democrats should speak with one voice. If they can’t, they’ll prove definitively that they failed to learn one major lesson from the Obama presidency. Give prejudice any oxygen, and it will ignite.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 23, 2019
Highlights From CNN’s Town Halls With Five 2020 Candidates

On Monday night, CNN hosted back-to-back town halls with five Democratic-primary contenders: Amy Klobuchar, Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders, Kamala Harris, and Pete Buttigieg. Some of the candidates used the opportunity to double down on campaign policies, as Senator Klobuchar did, while others used their time to come out in favor of new stances, like when Senator Harris and Mayor Buttigieg joined Senator Warren in supporting the impeachment of President Trump. Below, highlights from the marathon in New Hampshire broken down by candidate.
The Minnesota senator stuck to her staunchly moderate position, hoping to appeal to party centrists who have not been attracted to a Biden run. Klobuchar provided a dissent to Elizabeth Warren’s proposed cancellation of student debt and elimination of tuition at public colleges: “I wish I could staple a free college diploma under every one of your chairs,” Klobuchar told the crowd. “I do. Don’t look. It’s not there. I wish I could do that, but I have to be straight with you and tell you the truth.” Klobuchar instead suggested an expansion of the Pell Grant program that would allow students to refinance loans.
Klobuchar came out against the impeachment of President Trump, and promoted her record of campaigning “where it’s uncomfortable” and winning in Republican districts in Minnesota. It was a prospect that didn’t necessarily entice the crowd: “Every single time I have run, I have won every single congressional district in my state, including Michele Bachmann’s … That’s when you guys are supposed to cheer, okay?”
Warren’s impressive performance demonstrated why she could be a serious contender, despite disappointing early polling: Not only does she have the most robust policies of the primary class, she can back them up with big-picture rationales without getting bogged down in white-paper detail.
The Massachusetts senator defended her ambitious education reform, explaining that an “ultra-millionaire tax” that taxes “two cents on every dollar of the great fortunes above $50 million” would cover her tuition plan and more. “Here’s the stunning part,” Warren told the crowd. “If we put that two-cent wealth tax in place on the 75,000 largest fortunes in this country — two cents — we can do universal child care for every baby, zero to five, universal pre-K, universal college, and knock back the student loan burden for 95 percent of our students and still have nearly a trillion dollars left over.”
At points it seemed Sanders was trying to outflank Warren from the left, like when he upheld his support for giving the vote to incarcerated Americans. When a student asked if the Vermont senator believed the Boston bomber should be enfranchised, Sanders replied that his policy applied “even for terrible people, because once you start chipping away and you say, ‘Well, that guy committed a terrible crime; not going to let him vote. Well, that person did that; not going to let that person vote,’ you’re running down a slippery slope.”
Sanders also reiterated his criticism of the Netanyahu government in Israel with a call to change American foreign policy in the region: “I just believe that the United States should deal with the Middle East on a level playing field basis. In other words, the goal must be to try to bring people together and not just support one country, which is now run by a right-wing — dare I say — racist government.” He also said he was “rightfully criticized” in the 2016 election for ignoring foreign policy, and suggested 2020 Democrats shouldn’t get impeachment tunnel vision, as it could “work to Trump’s advantage.”
Harris announced her support for impeaching the president during Monday night’s event. Democrats should be “realistic about what might be the end result,” but it doesn’t mean “the process shouldn’t take place,” she said.
Harris also joined Warren, Julián Castro, and Cory Booker in their calls to revisit the debate over reparations: “We should study it and see.” Harris also announced a 100-day promise on gun reform: “Upon being elected, I will give the United States Congress 100 days to get their act together and have the courage to pass reasonable gun-safety laws. If they fail to do it, then I will take executive action.”
Buttigieg backed Harris’s tentative support for impeachment and countered Sanders on his stance on prisoners voting: “While incarcerated? No, I don’t think so.” When host Anderson Cooper charged the South Bend mayor with being light on substance thus far, Buttigieg said he didn’t want to drown voters in “minutiae,” and cited his support of a “Medicare for All Who Want It” system as an example of his policy proposals.
Buttigieg also responded to a controversy in South Bend regarding recordings by police officers allegedly containing racist comments about former police chief Darryl Boykins, who is black. “I was, frankly, a little slow to understand just how much anguish underlay the community’s response,” Buttigieg said. “It wasn’t just about whether we were right or wrong to be concerned about the federal Wiretap Act. It was about whether communities of color could trust that communities had their best interest at heart.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 22, 2019
Watch Amy Klobuchar’s ‘Please Clap’ Moment

At a Monday town hall on CNN, senator and 2020 Democratic candidate Amy Klobuchar told the audience of her history of electoral wins in the ex-purple state of Minnesota: “When I started running for office, the other senator was Republican, the governor was Republican, and three of four constitutional officers were Republican. And then I started running and every single time I’ve run I’ve won every single congressional district in my state, including Michele Bachmann’s.”
Klobuchar paused, adding, “It’s when you guys are supposed to cheer, okay?”
The moment was immediately reminiscent of Jeb Bush’s February 2016 speech in which he promised a “quieter” presidency to an extremely quiet audience; Bush had to prod the New Hampshire audience with a notorious “Please clap.” Though Klobuchar handled the moment with more poise and humor than Bush — the former Florida governor said the phrase in a desperate, defeated tone — it’s not the ideal comparison for a candidate who’s currently winning just 2 percent of Democratic-primary voters, according to Morning Consult.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 22, 2019
Bernie Sanders Doesn’t Need 2016 Support Levels to Win Lots of Delegates

A popular pastime among those who are skeptical of Bernie Sanders’s chances of winning the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination is to compare his actual 2016 share of the vote in this or that state to where he stands in the polls right now. Here’s a tweet from Nate Silver doing just that:
My first reaction to this sort of comparison is that it doesn’t make a lot of sense to compare Sanders’s standing in 2016’s two-candidate field to where he is in a 20-candidate field so far this year. Matt Yglesias does have a response to that, though one that raises more questions than it answers:
The planted axiom here is that only “die hard” support from the get-go can win a presidential nomination. And the assumption that Bernie’s ceiling isn’t all that high is presumably based on Democrats’ proportional-delegate-award rules, in which you can’t win a majority of delegates with a consistent minority of popular votes in the caucuses and primaries, right?
Well, that’s sort of right. What this type of calculation ignores that’s particularly relevant in the current vast 2020 field is the Democrats’ 15 percent threshold: a candidate must hit that mark in the awarding jurisdiction (congressional or state legislative districts, or a state as a whole, depending on state rules) to get any pledged delegates. So if a lot of candidates don’t meet that threshold, then candidates that do are going to get more delegates than their share of the popular vote would initially indicate.
With that in mind, let’s look at recent poll standings (using FiveThirtyEight’s new comprehensive database of state primary and caucus polls) of Democratic candidates in the early states and see who’s above the threshold.
* In six Iowa polls taken in the last two months, Biden and Sanders are over the threshold in every one and no one else reaches it in any one.
* In four New Hampshire polls taken in the last two months, again, Biden and Sanders are over the threshold in every one and no one else reaches it in any one.
* There been just one recent Nevada poll, and it shows — you guessed it —Biden and Sanders over the threshold, with no one else even close.
* In one of two South Carolina polls taken in the last two months, Biden and Sanders are the only qualifiers for delegates (statewide, at least), and in the other, Sanders fall just short and no one else is close.
* The mold is broken in two recent polls in California (technically not an early state, but the most important state voting immediately thereafter, and where voting will begin even earlier), where home-state senator Kamala Harris gets above the threshold along with Biden and Sanders.
* And just to give a sense of where candidates stand in other states: There have been 17 national polls in the last two months, and guess what? Biden and Sanders are over the threshold in all of them, and no one else is over the threshold in any of them.
Now obviously it’s early, and obviously Biden and Sanders are the best-known candidates. Support for some of the lesser-known candidates may blossom, and for others it will probably wither as the first debates come and go and campaigning begins in earnest. But candidates who fade and/or drop out are likely going to give back some of their vote share to the front-runners, and those who stay in but fail to meet thresholds in this or that place will in effect give their share of the votes proportionately to those who get more than 15 percent. What makes Biden and Sanders special is that they are pretty strong everywhere, and thus are likely not to get shut out. So they have hidden delegate strength.
Over time, a winnowed field could lead to an overwhelming Biden lead that Sanders cannot overcome, or the converse. And one or two or three of the currently below-the-threshold candidates could gain strength and begin to pick up delegates, and a new front-runner or viable dark horse could emerge. But the thing to understand right now about Bernie Sanders is that he’s in a great position to get a big chunk of delegates in the early going (60 percent of the pledged delegates will be awarded in a two-week period from March 3 until March 17) — a bigger chunk than his share of the popular vote in polls would indicate — and also to survive to the later contests where a winnowed field means more votes and more delegates for the remaining candidates. And that’s not even factoring in his boffo fundraising.
In sum, Bernie Sanders may not need 2016 support levels until late in the nominating contest, and by then it could be a whole new ballgame for whoever is left.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 22, 2019
Trump’s Fed Pick: ‘No Women’ Involved in Men’s Sports Unless They’re Hot

Stephen Moore, the ardent supply-sider tapped by President Trump to serve on the Federal Reserve board, has had to defend his qualifications for the job in the past couple of weeks. Today he may be wishing people were more focused on his lack of fitness for the Fed: Thanks to a new report from CNN, Moore is in the news instead for his misogynistic ramblings about women in sports.
In columns from 2001, 2002, and 2003, Moore wrote that women working as referees in men’s college-basketball games is an “obscenity” and that women playing pickup basketball with men is a “travesty.” In one column, he wondered, “Is there no area in life where men can take a vacation from women?”
Moore continued:
Noting that Bernstein, a former sideline reporter for CBS, “should wear a halter top,” he added, “This is a no-brainer, CBS. What in the world are you waiting for?”
Writing about women announcers in a 2001 column, Moore wrote, “Is nothing sacred? This is like having wives attend a bachelor party.”
In another column, Moore criticized female professional tennis players for making more money than amateur male players who, he wrote, “could beat them handily.”
Moore’s defense? “This was a spoof. I have a sense of humor,” he told CNN. But the “just joking” excuse doesn’t hold up to scrutiny, considering the long history of misogyny in Moore’s writing.
Adam K. Raymond







Apr. 22, 2019
Elizabeth Warren Is Coming for Your Student Loan Debt

Americans owe at least $1.5 trillion in student loan debt. That stark figure drives up rates of poverty among the elderly and depresses rates of home ownership and parenthood among young adults. Public college tuition, meanwhile, continues to rise so extravagantly that it consistently outpaces the amount of aid offered to students in need. Student debt is a national crisis, and candidates angling for the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination in 2020 are likely to address it repeatedly on the campaign trail. Senator Bernie Sanders ran on the promise of free public college in 2016, and may owe his popularity with younger voters in part to his free college proposal.
But Sanders has some stiff competition for that vote, and for the title of furthest-left candidate in general. Senator Elizabeth Warren escalated her years-long war on student loan servicers on Monday, when her campaign released a sweeping student debt proposal that will likely set a standard for other candidates. Warren, in a Medium post, explained that her plan would cancel $50,000 of public and private student loan debt for individuals with household incomes under $100,000. Households making between $100,000 and $250,000 would receive partial debt cancellation; as the Daily Beast noted, the cancellation amount would then decline by “a dollar for every three dollars in income” above that $100,000 threshold, while households making over $250,000 would not receive any relief. A person with a household income of $160,000 could expect to shed $30,000 in student loan debt, according to an example included in Warren’s post. Seventy-five percent of student loan borrowers would have their debts completely wiped out. Warren added that she’d pay for the proposal — which also calls for the elimination of public college tuition — with a 2 percent tax on households making $50 million a year or higher.
Warren’s proposal doesn’t just set a standard for sheer generosity. It also links wealth redistribution explicitly to the resolution of long-standing racial inequities. If her proposal ever becomes law, it would also create a $50 billion federal fund for historically black colleges and universities, prohibit public colleges from considering an applicant’s citizenship status in the admissions process, and provide extra funding to states that improve college enrollment and graduation rates for students of color. One uniquely transformative position would end federal funding to for-profit schools. As sociologist Tressie McMillan Cottom exhaustively documented in her 2017 book, Lower Ed, for-profit schools aggressively target working-class, first-generation college students, who are disproportionately likely to be women and people of color. Students who attend for-profit schools tend to leave with high debt and credentials they often can’t use, and are thus more likely than average to default on their loans. Warren would make it much more difficult for these schools to stay in business. At the same time, she introduced a raft of proposals that would make it easier for students of color to not only enroll in legitimate colleges, but graduate.
Overall, Warren’s new proposals are welcome entries to the student loan debate, but they aren’t without their flaws. Income-based standards for debt cancellation would reduce or even withhold assistance from some households. On paper, a household income of $100,000 seems high. But in expensive areas, household income isn’t necessarily a useful way to gauge a family’s ability to pay back student loans. Factor in the cost of rent or a mortgage, plus transportation costs, groceries, child care, and medical expenses, and $100,000 can evaporate with frightening speed. And while it may be difficult to feel much sympathy for anyone making over $250,000 a year, individuals in high-earning professions can carry massive, life-altering student debt loads. Research reported by Stat in 2017 shows that medical school graduates now owe an average of $176,000 in student loan debt; at the same time, fewer new doctors owed any money at all, which may be evidence that a growing number of graduates are wealthy enough to self-fund their expensive educations, and that students from less-privileged backgrounds may bear the brunt of the profession’s collective student debt load. American doctors can expect to make high salaries, depending on their specialties, but the prospect of enormous student debt could still deter lower-income students from entering medical school at all. Debt cancellation would level the field.
Despite its issues, Warren’s proposal is more radically progressive than Sanders’s College for All Act, which he introduced in 2017. Sanders’s bill would eliminate public college tuition, but it proposed refinancing student loans and returning interest rates to pre-2006 levels in lieu of full debt cancellation. As a candidate, he has yet to introduce an updated college-affordability proposal. But when he does, he’ll be judged by the standard Elizabeth Warren just set.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 22, 2019
Trump Finally Pulls Plug on Cain for Fed

It’s been obvious since at least April 11 that Trump’s interest in placing Herman Cain — former pizza chain executive, right-wing radio gabber, and 2012 presidential candidate — on the Federal Reserve Board was waning. That’s when four Republican senators, enough to sink any confirmation, signaled it was a bad idea.
But last week Cain himself, apparently annoyed at the resuscitation of one of the sexual-misconduct allegations that helped sink his White House run, reiterated his determination to push for a spot on the monetary policy-setting body:
Either he changed his mind, or had it changed for him:
It’s pretty likely that the people around Trump — and their allies in the Senate — made it plain that theirs is an administration that just doesn’t need additional association with allegations of male sexual entitlement. The New York Times reported some sub-rosa Republican groans of exasperation when Cain’s name first came up:
The complaints finally sank in, and thus Herman Cain will not be able to pursue his eccentric ideas on the Fed. As my colleague Jonathan Chait observed recently, he was a strange choice for a president who allegedly fears tight-money policies on the Fed:
So Trump will have to look for a different media personality to fill Cain’s abandoned spot. But he’s got enough trouble with the Fed prospect he hasn’t bagged so far, Stephen Moore, who has his own problems.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 22, 2019
Supreme Court to Decide Whether Anti-Discrimination Laws Cover LGBTQ Employees

With the U.S. Supreme Court having already established a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, you’d think the less controversial issue of protecting LGBTQ employees from discrimination based on sexual orientation would have long been resolved as well. But that issue, which involves statutory interpretation of civil-rights laws, is actually still in a legal limbo. That could soon change now that SCOTUS has agreed to review three cases in this area, two involving discrimination against gay people and a third assessing discrimination against transgender people.
Although 22 states have full or partial bans on employment discrimination based on sexual orientation, the primary federal law regulating employment discrimination, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, isn’t so clear. It prohibits discrimination based on “sex,” which has been for the most part defined as “gender.” A 1989 Supreme Court case, however, held that discrimination based on gender stereotypes (e.g., demanding “masculine” or “feminine” behavior or attire from employees) was covered by federal laws, and another in 1998 extended coverage to a man subjected to sexual harassment from other men.
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals recently held that Title VII did cover discrimination based on sexual orientation in the case of a New York skydiving instructor fired for telling a client he was gay, flatly concluding that “sexual orientation discrimination is motivated, at least in part, by sex and is thus a subset of sex discrimination.” But the 11th Circuit reached the opposite conclusion in the case of a child welfare services coordinator who claimed he was fired for being gay.
So while it’s impossible to know exactly why SCOTUS agreed to take these cases (it takes only four justices to do so), it could simply be in order to resolve conflicting lower-court decisions, without some grand predetermined design of where the Court will move. But as Think Progress’s Ian Millhiser points out, this will be the first big LGBTQ-rights case for SCOTUS since gay-rights pioneer Anthony Kennedy was replaced by Brett Kavanaugh, which creates some grounds for pessimism.
SCOTUS will also review a Sixth Circuit decision holding that Title VII covers discrimination against transgender people, in a case involving a Michigan funeral director. Since this form of discrimination clearly involves gender identity, there may be an especially strong argument for its coverage in gender-focused federal anti-discrimination laws.
The Michigan case also shows why the SCOTUS decision could be particularly momentous: The fired employee was originally supported in her suit by the Obama administration’s Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which ruled in 2012 that Title VII protected transgeder employees, and in 2015 made the same decision with respect to LGBTQ employees generally. Predictably enough, the Trump administration’s Justice Department has opposed these EEOC precedents, and if not blocked by SCOTUS, the president’s EEOC appointees are sure eventually to rescind them.
These cases, of course, are at a very preliminary stage; having granted a petition for review, SCOTUS will now have to schedule oral arguments, and a decision isn’t likely until next year at the earliest.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 22, 2019
Mueller Exposed Trump’s Biggest Betrayal

The most important line in the Mueller report appears in the introduction to Volume I: “The Russian government interfered with the 2016 election in sweeping and systematic fashion.” Our president’s response has fallen woefully short. And now we know why.
As with all things, Donald Trump made the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller all about him. But it is about so much more: our national security and the future of our democracy. Trump’s failure to protect our country from future attacks is his biggest betrayal.
Mueller has published a detailed accounting of Russia’s attack on our presidential election. His report describes how Russia conducted a social-media disinformation campaign and weaponized email messages to sabotage the election. Mueller’s description of the Russia attack makes it clear that information warfare is the new battleground.
And yet Trump continues to minimize the threat to our national security. Concerned more about the legitimacy of his presidency than the integrity of future elections, Trump still downplays the Russian attack.
The Mueller report offers insights into Trump’s thinking: “Several advisors recalled that the President-Elect viewed stories about his Russian connections, the Russia investigations, and the intelligence community assessment of Russian interference as a threat to the legitimacy of his electoral victory.” Former communications director Hope Hicks said that Trump “viewed the intelligence community assessment as his ‘Achilles heel’ because, even if Russia had no impact on the election, people would think Russia helped him win, taking away from what he had accomplished.” Her predecessor, Sean Spicer, “recalled that the President thought the Russia story was developed to undermine the legitimacy of his election.” Former deputy campaign chairman Richard Gates “said the President viewed the Russia investigation as an attack on the legitimacy of his win.” White House chief of staff Reince Priebus “recalled that when the intelligence assessment came out, the President-Elect was concerned people would question the legitimacy of his win.”
In other words, Trump was more concerned about appearing to have won a decisive victory in the election than about acknowledging and addressing an attack on our country by a foreign adversary.
Trump’s receptiveness to Russia’s overtures may even have encouraged the attacks. Despite Attorney General William Barr’s characterization that Mueller found no collusion, Mueller’s report tells a different story. Mueller says that the evidence was not sufficient to charge any member of the Trump campaign with conspiring with representatives of the Russian government to interfere in the 2016 election. But “the investigation identified numerous links between individuals with ties to the Russian government and individuals associated with the Trump campaign.”
Trump’s denials of Russian interference date back to the campaign. In July 2016, the Democratic National Committee announced that it had been hacked by Russian government actors. Rather than denouncing the attack, Trump playfully encouraged Russia interference, at one point publicly asking, “Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing.” According to Mueller’s report, within five hours, Russian hackers tried to hack Hillary Clinton’s personal email. While the episode was not part of a formal agreement to interfere with the election, it was the kind of mutually beneficial conduct that encouraged Russia to continue its aggression.
During his first debate with Hillary Clinton, Trump deflected blame from Russia, when he famously said, “I don’t think anybody knows it was Russia that broke into the DNC … I mean, it could be Russia, but it could also be China. It could also be lots of other people. It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, okay?”
Even after winning the election and becoming president, Trump continued to shift blame from Russia. In June 2017, Trump tweeted that Russian hacking was a “big Dem HOAX,” asking “ … Why did the DNC REFUSE to turn over its Server to the FBI, and still hasn’t? It’s all a big Dem scam and excuse for losing the election!”
Then last July, Trump stood next to Russian president Vladimir Putin in Helsinki and outraged many American government officials when he indicated that he believed Putin when he said that it was not Russia who had interfered with the election, despite such a finding by the U.S. intelligence community.
Now we know why Trump continues to minimize Russia’s role. Trump’s narcissism about the legitimacy of his election has prevented him from publicly acknowledging Russia’s attack and providing the leadership necessary to protect us from more. A president whose focus was on leading our nation would eagerly provide deterrence to Russia in the form of sanctions and retaliation for election hacking. (While the U.S. has imposed new sanctions, at times Trump has resisted congressional efforts to punish Russia.) In addition, a responsible president would make cybersecurity a top priority of the Department of Homeland Security. Instead, Trump sows discord in our country by making immigration enforcement his prime focus.
Trump’s reaction to Russia interference will only embolden our adversary for future attacks. His self-absorption prevents him from fulfilling his duty that the laws be faithfully executed. Now that the Mueller investigation is over, and Trump’s motives have been exposed, staffers and Congress must play a stronger role in pushing Trump to the side and hardening our election system against attacks.
Barbara McQuade



Apr. 22, 2019
Democrats Should Court the Economically Anxious Trump Voters Who Don’t Exist

A couple of very long years ago, 62.9 million Americans voted to make a racist reality star — who, by his own account, had no experience at governing, but plenty at groping random married women — their president. By the time these votes were cast, Donald Trump had called for banning all Muslims from the United States, led a movement contesting the first black president’s legitimacy, insinuated that the bulk of Mexican-Americans were drug dealers or rapists, praised his supporters for assaulting (nonwhite) protesters, and vowed to subject each and every one of America’s 11 million undocumented immigrants, including those brought to the U.S. as children, to deportation.
Nevertheless, 46 percent of the U.S. electorate thought him worthier of the White House than a former senator and secretary of State (who just happened to be the first major-party nominee with the kind of genitalia that Trump boasted about grabbing).
For many liberals, it is difficult to reconcile this set of facts with a magnanimous view of their Trump-voting compatriots. And it is harder still to hear nonpartisan political analysts — and even some putatively progressive pundits — attribute the demagogue’s victory to motives as innocent as “economic anxiety,” or even to his opponent’s failures of empathy. As if Republican voters’ decision to rally behind a self-professed pussy-grabber had somehow discredited Hillary Clinton’s suggestion that there were “deplorables” among them. For decades, progressives had been begging the mainstream media to acknowledge the centrality of racial animus and misogyny to the GOP’s appeal. Now, the party had traded its dog whistle for a foghorn; “self deportation” for a Muslim ban; and the patriarchy’s polite, paternalistic superego for its bawdy, hateful id. The mask was off. The unsightly (and oddly orange) face of reaction fully exposed.
And the press was just going to veil it with thousand sympathetic profiles of Trump country and its humble, forgotten folk?
Academic autopsies of the 2016 election have largely validated blue America’s exasperation. A hefty body of political-science research has established that the more “racially conservative,” “hostilely sexist,” concerned about immigration, or distrustful of Muslims a 2016 voter was, the more likely they were to support Trump, no matter their partisan or ideological self-identification. No similar correlation has held between Trump support and economic dissatisfaction. More broadly, Trump’s coalition was almost identical to Mitt Romney’s — and while the 2016 GOP nominee did attract a bit more support from working-class whites, the available data suggests that this had less to do with the mogul’s sporadic appeals to economic populism than with his near-constant stoking of white racial resentments and anxieties about demographic change.
To be sure, economically insecure Rust Belt voters — who pulled the lever for Trump primarily out of a well-founded resentment of Clinton’s support for NAFTA, or of Barack Obama’s failure to arrest their region’s postindustrial decline — surely exist. And there is evidence that human beings become less tolerant and more tribal amid conditions of scarcity. Thus, it’s conceivable that Trump’s brand of white grievance politics would have had less appeal in 2016, had policy-makers averted the past four decades of stagnant middle-class wages and soaring individual and regional inequality. Finally, it would be unfair (or at least ungenerous) to deny the existence of conservative voters who oppose mass immigration primarily out of an aversion to change, rather than an investment in a soft form of white nationalism (there are millions of nonwhite Trump voters in this county, after all).
All that said: The idea that the typical Trump voter (or even, typical Obama-to-Trump voter) was a downwardly mobile proletarian — who grudgingly looked past Trump’s racism and sexism out of desperate hope that an outsider might deliver genuine economic change — has no empirical validity.
And yet many of the Democratic Party’s 2020 hopefuls are preaching that convenient untruth, anyway. On a recent trip to South Carolina, Pete Buttigieg argued that a lot of Trump voters knew the mogul was “not a good guy, walked into the voting booth and voted to burn the house down because of some very deep issues that motivated them to send a message.”
“Some of which I think we should give no quarter to, like racism, but others of which deserve to be taken seriously,” the mayor of South Bend continued. “The sense of displacement, and the belief that Democratic and Republican presidencies have let them down, and the failure of this enormous American prosperity to reach so many people in so many communities.”
Bernie Sanders expressed similar sentiments at a CNN town hall last month. “I’m not going to say that within Trump’s camp there aren’t some people who are racists and sexists,” the Vermont senator said. “There are. We have seen that. But I don’t believe that is the case for most of those folks. I think many of these people are people who have worked hard their entire lives and their standard of living is going down, in many cases, they’re making less today than they did 30 or 40 years ago.”
Sanders and Buttigieg are far from alone among Democratic candidates in insisting that there was really only ever a thimbleful of “deplorables.” Plenty of others have suggested that a 2016 Trump vote is (more or less) the language of the unheard.
And all things considered, that’s probably for the best.
The politician and the public intellectual have two very different jobs. The latter is tasked with telling the best approximation of the truth they can muster — especially when said truth is uncomfortable or unpopular. We need political scientists willing to overturn our most cherished presumptions about actually existing democracy, historians eager to recover our republic’s most violently suppressed memories, and commentators who illuminate our collective complicity in contemporary injustice.
In certain contexts, on certain subjects, we need elected officials to do the same. But the politician’s primary vocation isn’t to speak truth to power — it is to win power, and then exercise it in a manner that advances the greater good. In a representative democracy, that typically means rallying the largest possible coalition behind you, your party, and its governing priorities. Depending on one’s definition of the greater good, that task may well involve a great deal of uncomfortable truth telling. But any politician who cares more about expressing (what she perceives in a given moment to be) the unvarnished truth than about using state power to improve people’s lives has chosen the wrong line of work.
Democratic candidates may do well to describe the Republican Party’s agenda, elected officials, and electoral strategy in unflinching terms. The modern GOP exists to entrench plutocracy by cultivating white Americans’ racial and cultural animosities. It is becoming increasingly forthright in its opposition to democracy and contempt for the most basic rights of vulnerable minorities. Refusing to indulge in euphemism when describing where the conservative movement is taking the country seems both socially useful and (relatively) electorally benign. Donald Trump is an immensely unpopular president. The less distance there is in the popular imagination between his illiberalism and extremity and the Republican Party’s, the better off Team Blue will be.
But to insist that Democrats explicitly impute ignominious motives to GOP voters is to insist on the commission of political malpractice. It may be a sociological fact that most conservative voters who support Trump’s immigration agenda — and revile Barack Obama — do so (at least in part) out of an anxiety about white America’s declining cultural and political dominance. But the percentage of soft Trump supporters who consciously understand themselves to be motivated by racial anxiety or animus is bound to be on the smaller side.
And you won’t win many swing voters’ hearts and minds by telling them you know their hearts and minds better than they do (no matter how many links to regressions of voter file data you provide them).
Hillary Clinton spent much of 2016 arguing that Ronald Reagan would never vote for Donald Trump. At the Democratic National Convention, a series of speakers — including Barack Obama — argued that the patron saint of the conservative movement would recoil at Trump’s authoritarian ethos. At a September press conference, the Democratic nominee suggested that the Gipper would be incensed to see the Republican nominee praise Vladimir Putin while disparaging the American president. One of her super-PACs’ final campaign ads cast Reagan’s ghost as a Clinton surrogate.
Clinton’s campaign did not embrace such messaging out of sincere reverence for the man who killed off the New Deal consensus. And when promoting the idea that Trump’s GOP represented a radical break from Reagan’s, her team certainly wasn’t telling difficult truths. There are worthwhile distinctions to be drawn between Trumpism and Reaganism. But the president who launched his 1980 campaign by preaching “state’s rights” in Philadelphia, Mississippi, had no intolerance for racial demagogy. And the commander-in-chief who presided over Iran-Contra was no stalwart opponent of authoritarianism or defender of (small-r) republican values. Clinton did not favorably contrast Reagan (and Paul Ryan and Bob Dole) with her opponent out of fidelity to the truth. She did so because she believed such comforting fictions might make it easier for Trump-averse GOP voters to cross the aisle in 2016.
Human beings do not forfeit old identities with ease or eagerness. Revising one’s self-conception can be painful, particularly when doing so involves admitting error. Thus, Clinton offered longtime GOP voters a way to vote for her without having to disavow their previous voting behavior or self-conception as Reagan conservatives. This was hardly a novel gambit (see Nixon, Democrats for). And many Mitt Romney voters accepted Clinton’s offer — and if they didn’t (almost) all happen to live in the suburbs of deep blue states, she would have won the presidency as a result.
When Buttigieg, Sanders & Co. suggest that most Trump voters backed the mogul out of an understandable (if misplaced) desire for economic change, they are performing the same maneuver. The point is to make it as unthreatening as possible for such voters to change their minds. “I understandably felt that Trump was the candidate most likely to address my legitimate concerns, but he has now broken his promises, and betrayed my trust” is an easier thing to tell oneself than “I backed Trump out of a desire to protect my unearned racial privilege, but I now recognize the shamefulness of my white fragility (and that of most of my friends and family).”
As Alana Conner, executive director of Stanford University’s Social Psychological Answers to Real-World Questions Center, told Vox’s German Lopez in 2018, “Telling people they’re racist, sexist, and xenophobic is going to get you exactly nowhere. It’s such a threatening message. One of the things we know from social psychology is when people feel threatened, they can’t change, they can’t listen.”
Another well-documented aspect of human psychology is that we are not always conscious of the motivations governing our behavior. And the way we remember the motivations behind our past decisions — or even what those decisions were — is influenced by our perceptions in the present. In fact, it is quite common for people to misremember whom they voted for in the past so as “to reconcile it with how they currently wish to vote,” a phenomenon researchers call “reconciliation.” One implication of these realities: Even if a given Trump voter did not support the president in 2016 on the basis of economic concerns, it is conceivable that a sufficiently talented and charismatic Democratic politician can convince said voter that she did.
Some liberals may see the empirical work showing the prevalence of reactionary racial attitudes among Trump voters in general, and Obama-to-Trump voters in particular, as evidence that no significant number of such voters are winnable, no matter how nonthreateningly they’re approached. And perhaps this is the case. But that argument sits in tension with the fact that the Democratic Party already depends on the support of voters with what some political scientists categorize as “racially resentful views.” Although the Democratic coalition is becoming more racially liberal, Vanderbilt political scientist Larry Bartels has shown that, in 2017, some 33 percent of Democratic voters agreed with the statement, “discrimination against whites is as big a problem today as discrimination against blacks and other minorities”; 39 percent felt that “people who disrespect the American flag don’t belong in this country”; and some 55 percent insisted that “speaking English is essential for being a true American.”
Many progressive policies and value propositions enjoy majoritarian support. But the percentage of Americans who hold the liberal position on each and every political question is tiny (as is the percentage that espouses uniformly conservative views). For progressives, there is no alternative to finding ways to make common cause with the unenlightened.
Some may argue that Democrats could reduce their dependence on such voters by bringing more people of color into the electorate, and that calling out the racism of Trump voters (or at least avoiding the temptation to impute empirically baseless motives to them) will further that objective. And without question, registering nonwhite voters and defending their right to the franchise from Republican attacks should be a top priority of the Democratic Party. But the notion that there is an inherent trade-off between courting marginal Trump voters (by paying lip service to their theoretical economic anxiety), and mobilizing politically disengaged nonwhite voters, is under-substantiated. No modern-day political figure has ever had more success at mobilizing disengaged nonwhite voters than Barack Obama — and he devoted far more rhetorical energy to scolding black America for its cultural pathologies than to upbraiding white Republicans for their complicity in structural racism.
Regardless, due to the way political representation is apportioned in this country, there are significant limits to what a progressive movement can achieve without making some inroads with the kinds of white, non-woke voters who backed Trump in 2016. You can’t free African-Americans in Oklahoma from the scourge of reactionary rule through increasing nonwhite voter turnout alone.
To make transformative change in the long term, progressive activists and intellectuals might well need to awaken their fellow citizens to the ubiquity of white revanchism in American politics — while also expanding the popular definition of racism, so as to stigmatize forms of political behavior that indirectly perpetuate racial inequity.
But to minimize the power of an increasingly racist and authoritarian Republican Party in the immediate term, Democratic presidential candidates need to court the racially innocent, economically anxious white Trump voter — even if he does not (yet) exist.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 22, 2019
Sarah Sanders Lies About Reporter Who Called for Her to Be Fired for Lying

Last Friday, reporter April Ryan called for White House press secretary Sarah Sanders to be fired. Appearing on CNN, Ryan was asked about the Mueller report revelation that Sanders lied when she said “countless” FBI agents contacted her to support President Trump’s firing of James Comey.
“Not only does she not have credibility, she lied,” Ryan said of Sanders, who had already lied about her lie. “She should be let go. She should be fired, end of story. When there is a lack of credibility there, you have to start and start lopping the heads off.”
On Fox & Friends Monday morning, Sanders was asked about Ryan’s comments. Naturally, she lied.
“I have had reporters say a lot of things about me. They’ve said I should be choked. They’ve said I should deserve a lifetime of harassment,” Sanders said. “I certainly never had anybody say I should be decapitated — this takes us to a new low even for the liberal media. I think it just once again proves why this journalist isn’t taken seriously.”
Of course, the press secretary, who works for one of the most inarticulate men in America, is purposefully mischaracterizing a figure of speech. But that’s no surprise coming from Sanders, who has an long-standing awkward relationship with both Ryan and the truth.
Adam K. Raymond



Apr. 22, 2019
Trump Really Doesn’t Like It When His Staff Takes Notes

Among the many details in the Mueller report that give credence to the claim that the Trump management style is akin to the operating policies of the mob is a January 2018 interaction with former White House counsel Don McGahn. Trump wanted McGahn to refute a report from the New York Times claiming he wanted to fire Robert Mueller the previous June. McGahn refused, which caused Trump to unfurl his frustrations about McGahn’s note-taking.
“Why do you take notes?” Trump asked, according to the Mueller report. “Lawyers don’t take notes. I never had a lawyer who took notes.”
McGahn replied that a “real lawyer” takes notes because they create a record.
“I’ve had a lot of great lawyers, like Roy Cohn,” Mr. Trump said. “He did not take notes.”
The incident showed the president’s contempt for any sort of record that could hinder him from obscuring or contradicting the truth. Occasionally that means video, like when Trump denied calling Tim Cook “Tim Apple” to his face although it occurred on TV. But most often it’s note-taking. According to a report from the New York Times, Trump consistently derides his aides for jotting down their thoughts on whatever norm-violation is at hand. Even more unconventional is the rationale for his staff’s note-taking:
The paper includes a new account of former national-security adviser H.R. McMaster, in which the president “snapped” at Trump from taking notes. “Why are you always writing in that book?” Trump asked, according to people in the room.
There is precedent in the White House for aides not to take notes so that they don’t end up on the public record. White House documents — including emails, meeting notes, and phone messages — must be preserved for archival purposes, and presidential diaries can be viewed by investigators, as Ronald Reagan learned during the Iran-Contra scandal. But the Trump White House may be the first administration in which aides take notes to protect themselves.
“I do think there’s also a pervasive sense in this White House that at some point you’re going to have to set the record straight or give your perspective on events that took place, or actions you took — or didn’t take — as the case may be,” Cliff Sims, a former communications aide told the Times. Former aide Omarosa Manigault Newman added, “The first time I worked in the White House, for the Clinton administration, we were reluctant to send as many emails or to document so many things. But in the Trump White House, it is a requirement that you document these things always to protect yourself.”
Unlike his staff, Trump hasn’t been in the habit of preserving his own notes and memos in the White House. According to a Politico report from April 2018, there were at least two government officials being paid over $60,000 to tape back together all the material that Trump rips up. “We got Scotch tape, the clear kind,” an official told Politico, in order to reassemble “anything that happened to be on his desk that he was done with.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 21, 2019
Giuliani: ‘Nothing Wrong’ With Accepting a Hostile Government’s Election Help

Trump defense attorney Rudy Giuliani was back on the air Sunday to respond to the newly released Mueller report, and for fans of his unique brand of headline-making “if he did it” legal speculation, the former New York mayor did not disappoint.
“There’s nothing wrong with taking information from Russians,” Giuliani explained to State of the Union host Jake Tapper on Sunday morning —though he added that he wasn’t sure he would have decided to do that himself and would have advised Trump against it.
The comments were in response to Senator Mitt Romney’s recent statement that he was “sickened” by what he read in the Mueller report and “appalled” that “fellow citizens working in a campaign for president [Trump] welcomed help from Russia, including information that had been illegally obtained, that none of them acted to inform American law enforcement.”
At first, Giuliani seemed to imply that Romney shouldn’t be criticizing others for accepting foreign assistance to a presidential campaign, remarking, “Man, if I could tell you the things [Romney] wanted to do [in the 2012 presidential campaign].” He then told Romney to “stop the bull” and to “stop this pious act that you weren’t digging up, trying to dig up dirt on people, putting dirt out on people.”
But pressed on the point that Romney wasn’t accepting information from foreign governments, Giuliani conceded that he did not know if Romney had done that. The hypocrisy, he maintained, was because “any candidate in the whole world in America would take information, negative [information].”
“From a hostile foreign source?” Tapper followed up.
“Who says it’s even illegal?” Giuliani replied, going on to make the point that the fruits of Russia’s hacked labor were printed by “every newspaper.”
“There’s nothing wrong with taking information from Russians,” he soon added. “It depends on where it came from.”
(On Meet the Press, Giuliani was similarly asked whether “it is now okay for political campaigns to work with material stolen by foreign adversaries?” His response was, “It depends on the stolen material.”)
“There’s no crime,” Giuliani maintained on State of the Union, getting annoyed with how Tapper kept wanted to know if he thought it was ethical to accept stolen information from a hostile foreign power in order to win a presidential campaign (rather than just let Giuliani try to articulate his narrow focus on the legality). Then again, America’s Mayor also tried to the muddle the difference between Mueller’s team finding insufficient evidence to prove a criminal conspiracy and not finding any evidence at all.
“They couldn’t find a single piece evidence for anything, hacking, dissemination,” claimed Giuliani.
“There’s an entire volume of evidence,” replied Tapper.
“There is an entire volume of stuff, of stuff, not of evidence,” the Trump lawyer responded.
Later on the show, former federal prosecutor Preet Bharara criticized Giuliani over his nonchalant views on the Trump campaign’s documented transgressions:
Chas Danner



Apr. 21, 2019
If Democrats Don’t Impeach Trump, They Could Still Censure Him

After the release of the redacted Mueller Report, an already-simmering debate among Democrats on whether to initiate impeachment proceedings against the president has intensified. Unsurprisingly, it spilled over into the 2020 presidential nominating contest when Senator Elizabeth Warren became the first major candidate to flatly endorse the immediate pursuit of impeachment and when some of her rivals (such as Julián Castro, who called impeachment “perfectly reasonable,” and Pete Buttigieg, who said Trump “deserved to be impeached”) inched closer to that position.
The decision will ultimately be up to House Democratic leaders, particularly Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Judiciary Committee chairman Jerrold Nadler, both of whom have resisted earlier calls for impeachment on grounds that without an extremely unlikely groundswell of Republican support it will go nowhere in the Senate and will overshadow efforts to defeat Trump in 2020.
But with each new drumbeat of pro-impeachment sentiment, the pressure increases on congressional Democratic leaders to do something other than simply agitate the air over Trump’s arguably criminal misconduct and then change the subject to health care or economic inequality. Issuing subpoenas for the full Mueller record is fine, as is securing the special counsel’s own testimony, and there are other avenues for further investigating Trump and his cronies. But the thirst for some moment of specific accountability for the president probably won’t be slaked by such measures.
There is one alternative approach that is quicker and simpler than impeachment, and doesn’t necessarily require any cooperation from the Senate. Washington Post columnist Karen Tumulty endorsed it in the wake of the Mueller release, while noting its shortcomings:
Unlike impeachment, a presidential censure has no specific constitutional authorization. Censure has been more customarily meted out by Congress to its own members (most famously Joe McCarthy in 1954) as a disciplinary measure short of the constitutionally sanctioned remedy of expulsion. As Tumulty noted, the Senate (controlled by the opposition Whigs) censured Jackson during a dispute over the Bank of the United States, but Democrats had the measure expunged from the record when they regained control of the chamber. Censure resolutions have been introduced but not enacted during multiple presidencies. Indeed, Trump’s behavior has already inspired the introduction of two House resolutions (one for his comments after the white-nationalist riot in Charlottesville, and another after his racist reference to Haiti and African nations as “shithole countries”).
The most relevant recent precedent, however, is almost certainly the effort by Democrats (encouraged by the White House) to censure Bill Clinton instead of impeaching him; Republicans defeated measures in both chambers (one in the House Judiciary Committee and the other on the Senate floor) to substitute censure for action on impeachment. In the hypothetical scenario Tumulty lays out, the shoe would be on the other foot with Democrats proposing to censure Trump, with or without any Republican cooperation.
Democrats could almost certainly pass a censure resolution in the House, without the kind of ponderous preparations impeachment would involve. If skillfully framed to condemn presidential behavior that no one condones, it might put some Republican members from swing districts on the spot. The Senate’s another matter; the power to filibuster a censure resolution means it would take 60 votes to pass it. Senators who are particularly vulnerable in 2020, like Susan Collins and Cory Gardner, would be hard-pressed to vote against it. And it’s possible even more GOP senators could go on record condemning their own president, creating a potent 2020 talking point against Trump himself. Read this post-Mueller statement by Mitt Romney and see if you think he would side with Trump against a censure resolution:
That sort of talk about Trump from people in both parties, formalized by a censure resolution, might put a bit of a dent in the president’s reelection effort, while setting Republicans who love him against those who simply tolerate him. But before moving in this direction, congressional Democrats would have to unite their own ranks behind the strategy, and so long as the fires of impeachment fever rage, that will not be easy.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 21, 2019
Mueller’s First Post-Report TV Comment: ‘No Comment’

On Easter Sunday in Washington, D.C., special counsel Robert Mueller attended mass at St. John’s Episcopal Church just north of the White House north lawn. Mueller, who maintained a devout press silence throughout his nearly two-year investigation into Trump-campaign contacts with Russia, didn’t appear ready to break that pattern: When reporters asked him questions on the next steps of the post-report process, Muller replied with a simple “No comment” and got into his white SUV.
Mueller may soon have to provide more expansive answers. On Thursday, shortly after Attorney General William Barr’s pre-report press conference, House Judiciary Chairman Jerrold Nadler sent the special counsel a letter, requesting that he testify before the committee “no later than May 23, 2019.” Some of those House questions may be similar to those asked by MSNBC’s Mike Viqueira on Easter. Would Trump be indicted if he were “anyone but the president”? Regarding obstruction of justice, “why didn’t [he] make a recommendation to Congress one way or the other?”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 20, 2019
USCIS: Immigrants Linked to Legal Weed May Be Morally Unfit for Citizenship

Immigrants with ties to marijuana, including in states where it has been legalized, can be denied U.S. citizenship, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced on Friday. The new “policy guidance” is but the latest hard-line stance taken toward immigrants and immigration by the Trump administration — though USCIS framed the move as a rule-of-law issue. The agency warns of “immigration consequences” for any immigrant possessing, distributing, dispensing, or manufacturing cannabis, explaining how they “may lack good moral character” — something required for citizenship — if they are “found to have violated federal law, even if such activity has been decriminalized under applicable state laws.”
Documented, otherwise law-abiding immigrants who have worked in the ever-growing $10.5 billion U.S. marijuana industry, or who have used medical marijuana, could thus be denied naturalization “even if an applicant does not have a conviction or make a valid admission to a marijuana-related offense,” the agency wrote, leaving what appears to be a lot of wiggle room to deny a naturalization request. The only exception in the updated policy, according to Marijuana Moment, is for “a single offense of simple possession of 30 grams or less of marijuana,” or, as of Friday, for “paraphernalia offenses” related to that level of possession (though it’s worth noting that the Trump administration is hardly known for making exceptions when it comes to immigrants).
USCIS is “using the war on drugs to go after migrant community and that’s what they’ve been doing since day one,” the Drug Policy Alliance’s Michael Collins told NBC News following the announcement. Indeed, there have been reports that immigrants working in the marijuana industry have already been denied citizenship on “good moral character” grounds prior to the policy announcement, and it’s well known that the war on drugs has been used to disproportionally target people of color in America for as long as there has been a war on drugs.
The new policy also perpetuates the antiquated notion that smoking weed is somehow immoral, yet comes at a time when Americans are signaling historically high levels of acceptance toward the drug. A new CBS poll released on Friday found that a record 65 percent of Americans now favor the legalization of marijuana, and a record 55 percent now admit having tried it. Furthermore, 56 percent of Republicans now support legalization, as well as a majority of people ages 65 or older, which has always been the most weed-wary demographic. A majority of Americans in both parties (62 percent overall) don’t want the federal government to try to curtail marijuana sales in states where it has been legalized.
Good moral character “measures up to the standards of average citizens of the community in which the applicant resides,” according to USCIS. That means a green-card holder working at a cannabis dispensary in Colorado is probably more deserving of U.S. naturalization than a nativist policy-maker who persecutes someone who has done nothing wrong in the eyes of a bipartisan majority of Americans.
Chas Danner



Apr. 19, 2019
Warren Comes Out for Impeachment

After the release of the redacted Mueller report yesterday, there was a groundswell of progressive activist sentiment for countering William Barr’s lies and Team Trump’s wild celebrations of a fake “exoneration” with that ultimate-if-risky weapon of impeachment proceedings in the Democratic-controlled House. But the two Democratic leaders with the most power over the decision to pursue, forget about, or hold in reserve impeachment proceedings, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and House Judiciary Committee chairman Jerrold Nadler, didn’t sway from their earlier position that the time was not ripe for impeachment, so long as Republicans continue to show no interest in holding Trump accountable for his misconduct (Pelosi’s top lieutenant Steny Hoyer even ruled it out as an option).
My guess is that Team Pelosi figured they could wait out the initial angry excitement over the Mueller report and return to their previous strategy of investigating Trump and attacking him on a broad front, but not constraining themselves with an impeachment proceeding that was guaranteed to fail in the Senate, if not earlier.
But now there is a new dynamic, as one prominent 2020 Democratic presidential candidate has cast her candidacy into the whirlwind of the impeachment debate:
Warren embraced other arguments popular in Impeachment Now circles, such as this one:
And this one:
Cynics may decide that Warren is using this stance to give fresh momentum to a campaign that had (in the polls at least) underachieved in the early going. But in rebutting that argument, she can draw upon the reserves of respect she has earned by running what is without much question the most substantive, policy-heavy campaign in the 2020 cycle’s early going. Her posture on impeachment fits her better than it might a rival with a reputation for opportunism.
For the moment, her stance creates a strong likelihood that other candidates could follow; there could perhaps even be a stampede that eliminates Warren’s tactical advantage while confirming her status as a party trendsetter. And if she and other presidential candidates create a wave of support for impeachment that breaks down Pelosi & Co.’s resistance, Warren may have to deal with the ironic consequences of a development that blots out the sky and reduces the attention her policy proposals will receive.
If some candidates hold out against Warren, and impeachment remains a demand that enlivens grassroots progressives while terrifying pols, we may have a new point of division in a huge Democratic field.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 19, 2019
Has Joe Biden Lost His Ability to Unite Democrats?

By this time next week this will be official: Joe Biden is making his third race for the presidency (earlier runs were in 1988 and 2008). In conventional terms, he begins his campaign as the front-runner, or at worst the co-front-runner with fellow mid-septuagenarian Bernie Sanders. He has led in 36 of the 37 polls included in RealClearPolitics’ compilation of 2020 Democratic-nomination-contest surveys. He also leads in all the publicly available polls of Iowa, and even leads in Kamala Harris’s California.
But the big question haunting his candidacy now is whether he’s lost a precious political resource he had not so very long ago: the ability to unite his party across ideological and demographic lines. Precisely because of his age and long party service, concluding with his two terms as vice-president under the very popular (among Democratic voters, anyway) Barack Obama, Biden went into the cycle as a sort of intraparty Coalition of National Salvation option who could serve as a bridge between the Clinton-Obama era of Democratic politics and the presumably more progressive future. Indeed, talk in Biden’s camp about a possible one-term presidency seemed to promote this sense that Uncle Joe wouldn’t undermine the winds of change in the party but was instead an emergency candidate for the emergency conditions of the Trump era.
After months of constant reminders, however, of Biden’s long history of association with some of the less defensible political and policy trends of the Democratic Party of the past — particularly those in poor repute among those representing the minority and feminist constituencies that are now central to the party’s activist and rank-and-file base alike — he’s looking less like a revered senior figure and more like the north end of a southbound dinosaur. The fact that his reputation for insensitivity has been reinforced by allegations of much more recent inappropriate behavior toward women has given doubts about Biden a more urgent currency.
But at this stage, that’s mostly from the perception of progressive elites, not the people who will vote in next year’s caucuses and primaries. Biden’s standing in the horse-race polls has remained steady during the winter and spring of activist/media discontent with the former veep. Morning Consult’s tracking poll of Democrats currently gives him a sparkling approval ratio of 75/15. Perhaps even more significantly, the same poll shows him as the top second-place choice of those whose favorite is Kamala Harris, Beto O’Rourke, or Bernie Sanders. Based on that data, he looks like a fine potential unity candidate.
But it’s hard to know if that will last, particularly if and when his rivals start throwing some of the punches at him that have largely been confined to media elites and political Twitter so far. Imagine a sound-bite version of this argument from my colleague Rebecca Traister in the voice of a candidate during a debate or in a TV ad:
Biden’s standing as a unity candidate could also be undermined by his own efforts if he finds it necessary down the road to distinguish himself from more progressive candidates as representing a moderate tradition. And even if chooses instead to accommodate himself to a more self-consciously progressive electorate than the one that found him lacking in 1988 and 2008, he could be in danger of falling between stools, as Ross Douthat recently observed:
Douthat concludes that this “kind of Biden campaign would probably lose …I know this is harsh — as badly as Jeb Bush did.” You don’t have to share that opinion to wonder if Biden can pull off the requisite balancing act as his past record becomes a big deal to actual voters.
It’s also possible that Biden could restore his “unity candidate” persona not via any particular accommodation with his past or his party’s future, but by clearly establishing himself as the most — better yet, the only — electable opponent for Donald Trump.
The feasibility of an all-electability rationale for Biden may depend on your assessment of the much-discussed hypothesis that this native of Scranton has a unique ability to appeal to white working-class swing voters in the very Rust Belt states that Barack Obama won and Hillary Clinton lost. It’s very early for general-election trial heats to have any significance, and partisan polarization may eventually erase any differences among Democrats, but at present, Biden is doing better than any other Democrat when matched against the incumbent. If, as I’ve argued may well happen, Trump’s looking strong enough to produce a full-scale electability panic among Democrats next year, this is an advantage, if it holds, that would cover a lot of Biden’s perceived sins. He may well need it.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 19, 2019
Cuban Players Helped Build the Modern MLB. America Doesn’t Want To Help Them.

When Barack Obama visited Cuba in 2016, he went to a baseball game. It was the first time a sitting U.S. president had been to the island since Calvin Coolidge in 1928, and Obama celebrated the historic moment with Raúl Castro at an exhibition game between the Tampa Bay Rays and the Cuban national team (yes, they did the wave together). For Obama, baseball was a way of restoring diplomatic ties with a country that no longer seemed to be the enemy.
For Cuban nationals, playing in the majors became a difficult and dangerous proposition when Fidel Castro’s communist revolution toppled the U.S.-backed government in 1959. Castro forbid Cubans from playing abroad and banned professional sports in his own country — athletes were not even allowed to compete for earnings in Cuba until 2013. As the Cold War intensified, the U.S. imposed heavy restrictions on business dealings with Cuba through an embargo that is the longest in modern history. To play baseball in the States, Cuban players had to defect, braving black-market smugglers, flimsy fishing boats, or worse — to get to American shores. And defect they did — Cuban baseball players helped to build the modern MLB.
The Obama administration made attempts to lift the embargo, but failed to convince a Republican-controlled Congress and was only able to ease some of the trade and travel restrictions. In Obama’s last year in office, the Treasury Department granted Major League Baseball a license to negotiate a deal with the Cuban Baseball Federation. The MLB hoped to make it safer and easier for Cuban players to join the league. The two parties reached an agreement in December, and the federation recently released the first-ever list of 34 players eligible to sign without defecting.
But last Monday, the Trump administration canceled the MLB’s deal. Trump has taken a harsher stance against Cuba and is less willing to make exceptions — even if it means preventing human trafficking. Technically, the Cuban government operates the baseball federation, and the agreement stipulated that the federation would receive between 15 and 25 percent of a player’s signing bonus (similar to arrangements with Japan and South Korea). In a statement to the MLB, the administration rejected the deal on the basis that “a payment to the Cuban Baseball Federation is a payment to the Cuban government,” and is in violation of the embargo.
Sports reflect our changing political realities. According to Samuel Regalado, author of the book Viva Baseball!, rocky relations between the U.S. and Cuba continue to impact baseball players.
“The Trump administration is using these players as pawns to demonstrate their toughness against Cuba and reverse Obama policies,” Regalado said. “The trouble is, it forces the players to defect and go through human trafficking.”
Viva Baseball! charts the history of Latin American baseball players, revealing Cuba’s instrumental role in the league’s ethnic and racial integration. In the first half of the 20th century, Cuba led all other Latin American nations with 43 major leaguers (Mexico was next with just five players). In 1947, the New York Cubans won the Negro League championship, featuring soon-to-be major leaguers like Minnie Minoso. That same year, Jackie Robinson attended the Dodgers’ spring training in Havana, and would officially break the color barrier a few months later.
While the MLB still has difficulty attracting black athletes, the Latino population has taken off, thanks to Cuba’s early influence. This year, 251 out of the 882 players on opening-day rosters were born outside the U.S. — and 220 of those came from Latin America. The Dominican Republic led the way with 102 players. Cuba, however, only had 17 players, a result of the political realities that make for a dangerous journey to the majors.
Reds outfielder Yasiel Puig tried defecting 13 times and was kidnapped by a Mexican drug cartel before successfully making it to the MLB. White Sox first baseman Jose Abreu has said he still gets harrassed by “smugglers and unscrupulous agencies.” Yankees closer Aroldis Chapman escaped during a tournament in the Netherlands and never returned to Cuba, leaving his parents, sisters, girlfriend, and infant daughter behind.
“Unfortunately, [Cuban players] might find themselves making difficult decisions on how to get here,” Chapman said.
In a statement, the MLB stood by the goal of the agreement, “which is to end the human trafficking of baseball players from Cuba.” But for now, there is little the league can do. The Trump administration has prioritized political posturing over the safety of Cubans seeking opportunity, and it doesn’t come as a surprise. This administration’s hostility — especially for those coming from Latin American countries — has now extended to the baseball diamond. As always, it will be the least privileged that are the most affected.
“Most Americans view baseball through the prism of big ballparks and equal opportunity,” Regalado said. “We don’t realize that for every Aroldis Chapman, there’s dozens of Cubans who never made it.”
Will Fischer



Apr. 19, 2019
Mueller Report Subpoena Fight Is the First Skirmish in a Long War to Come

Now that a redacted Mueller report has finally gone public, the next stage in the fight over the president’s dodgy and quite possibly criminal behavior moves to Congress and maybe the courts. During the preceding week, a big preoccupation among House Democrats was forcing William Barr and the Justice Department to minimize redactions in the report and ensure that at least Congress would have access to an unredacted version. Barr has been offering to make available in the very near future a “minimally redacted” version to select must-see members of Congress, arguing that a court order would be necessary to disclose one area of redactions, material from grand jury proceedings.
This murky struggle over document access is continuing after the release of the public version, as the New York Times reports:
And so, as threatened, Nadler has issued subpoenas for the full report and all the supporting evidence, as the Washington Post explains:
The date is significant, as the Times notes:
At the same time, of course, Nadler is also making plans to secure an appearance by Robert Mueller himself before his committee.
That broader context is important to understand. The anticipatory fury over redactions was abated somewhat when the report came out: most of them were in sections of the report involving illegal activities by Russian nationals that did not appear to involve Trump campaign figures, and there were few redactions in the long passages on obstruction of justice. But still, Democrats feel, what you don’t know is important, and even in areas without redactions, the underlying evidence contained in subpoenaed documents could be very important.
Republicans, of course, want to “move on,” either to Trump’s preferred thematics of his own power and glory and Democratic evil, or to vengeful investigations of the FBI, the Obama administration, and Hillary Clinton. And Nadler and the House Democratic leadership need to show some forward momentum on investigations of Trump, with the questions raised by Mueller being the obvious starting point.
There’s also no question Nadler and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi need to get control of rapidly intensifying sentiment among members, and particularly among grassroots Democrats, that Mueller Time should now yield to Impeachment Time. They’ve both been skeptical about the political wisdom of going in that direction while keeping the door open to it if dismay at Trump’s behavior spreads far enough to put pressure on Republicans to stop defending him. The emotions surrounding the Mueller report could kick that door wide open.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 19, 2019
If Impeaching Trump Is Pointless, Then Bipartisanship Is Worthless

The president of the United States routinely orders his subordinates to subvert the law. He believes that the Justice Department should comport itself as his personal detective agency — and that the attorney general’s first responsibility is to protect the White House from legal accountability. And he has used one of his office’s most extraordinary powers — the authority to pardon convicted criminals — to undermine a federal investigation.
These realities were already apparent before Robert Mueller’s report was released Thursday. But they have now been formally confirmed by federal law enforcement. The branch of government responsible for enforcing the rule of law is led by a man with contempt for that very concept. Congress’s constitutional obligation in this circumstance is unambiguous. The president swore to “faithfully execute” the duties of his office. He has not. Thus, Congress should evict him from that office.
This would be true even if Donald Trump displayed no inclination to persist in his lawlessness. But he is displaying the opposite. Impeachment is therefore required not merely to punish the president for his past indiscretions — or to deter a future president from emulating them — but to halt the rampage of a serial offender. During his press conference (and/or lurid apologia for the president) on Thursday, Attorney General William Barr suggested that Trump’s various attempts to undermine the Russia investigation were understandable responses to an unprecedented situation. But the president does not defy the law exclusively in self-defense. Just this month, Trump fired the secretary of Homeland Security because she refused to entertain extralegal options for deterring undocumented immigration. More audaciously, the president also (reportedly) instructed Customs and Border Protection commissioner Kevin McAleenan to deny Central American families their legal right to seek asylum — and promised to pardon the CBP chief should anyone try to hold him accountable for this crime.
There is no defensible argument against impeaching this kind of president as a substantive matter. The only debate worth having concerns the political merits of such an endeavor.
House Democrats appear to believe that, in the present context, upholding their constitutional duty — by voting to remove a lawless president from office — would be politically unwise. Their reasoning goes something like this: Recent polls suggest a majority of the public wants Congress to “move on” from the Trump-Russia saga and opposes impeachment. Meanwhile, the impeachment process would eat up precious space in the legislative calendar, which could otherwise be used to hold public hearings on more politically resonant aspects of executive-branch malfeasance, and pass popular legislative proposals. And, most important, there is every reason to believe that a push for impeachment will end with the Senate acquitting the president. Which is to say: To the extent that the impeachment process would register at all with low-information swing voters, it would likely register as an unresolved partisan squabble. Trump’s malfeasance is surely a political asset for Democrats. But the president’s lawlessness isn’t subtle. Anyone who is willing and able to see that Trump is a crook already has. Better then to focus the party’s messaging on bread-and-butter issues that might speak to voters who are indifferent to Trump’s corruption.
I’m not sure that I accept this argument. But it strikes me as plausible. And if we stipulate that the president is a criminal (in spirit, if not legally provable fact) — and that Senate Republicans are, nevertheless, opposed to removing him from office — then the Democrats’ overriding civic obligation is to maximize the probability of their victory in 2020. All else being equal, it is more important to actually remove a would-be autocrat from office than to formally demonstrate one’s commitment to doing so.
All of this said, if House Democrats are taking the position that the Republican Party is so corrupt — and our system of checks and balances so obsolete — it isn’t even worth trying to uphold their constitutional responsibility to impeach a lawless president, then they need to acknowledge the radical implications of that stance.
If there is no bipartisan consensus on upholding the rule of law, then bipartisan consensus is not an end worth pursuing. If the Republican Party can’t be trusted to even consider putting its allegiance to lawfulness above its fealty to Donald Trump, then the GOP is a cancer on the body politic. And if our Constitution has brought us to the point where a non-democratically elected president can promise “Get Out of Jail Free” cards to anyone who violates laws he does not like — without facing any serious threat of removal from office — then our Constitution is obsolete and there is no cause for treating that document, or the established norms of our institutions, with reflexive reverence.
This is not an idle point. In recent weeks, many moderate Democratic senators have argued that their party should never abolish the legislative filibuster — because the Senate’s 60-vote threshold is a well-established institution that combats political polarization by forcing lawmakers to embrace bipartisan compromise. This argument fails on its own terms: The automatic 60-vote requirement for nearly all legislation is an invention of the 21st century, and its establishment has not coincided with a golden era of bipartisan compromise, but rather of gridlock and dysfunction.
But let’s ignore that for a minute. Let’s say the legislative filibuster (as it currently exists) is an age-old institution. Let’s say it effectively requires all major legislation to have some measure of bipartisan buy-in. If our established institutions have proved incapable of disciplining a president who disrespects the law, why should we presume the propriety of those institutions? And if there is no bipartisan consensus against allowing Republican presidents to flout the law, then what good is bipartisan consensus? Why should Democrats be compelled to forever and always give the GOP input on making laws when the two parties do not even share a commitment to the rule of law?
In other words, congressional Democrats’ fatalism about impeachment — and their reverence for institutional norms and the ideal of bipartisanship — are irreconcilable. And that has implications for much more than the debate over filibuster reform. It implies that commitment to small-r republican values requires prioritizing the GOP’s disempowerment over the preservation of institutional norms. If Democrats have the power to reduce the Republicans’ structural advantage in the Senate by granting statehood to D.C. and Puerto Rico on a party-line vote, they must do this. If the conservative judges continue to abet the GOP’s efforts to insulate itself from popular rebuke through voter suppression and gerrymandering, then Democrats must be prepared to reform the judiciary.
Democrats can insist that impeachment is a hopeless cause. And they can sing paeans to congressional norms and bipartisan comity. But if they do both, they will confirm that their party is just another one of our republic’s failing institutions.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 19, 2019
Proven Liar Sarah Sanders Asked About Lying, Lies Again

Following the firing of James Comey as FBI director, Sarah Sanders repeatedly stated that he had lost the confidence of the rank and file, “countless” numbers of whom had said as much. One of the small comic subplots of the Mueller report reveals that Sanders conceded that “her reference to hearing from ‘countless members of the FBI’ was a ‘slip of the tongue,’” and that “her statement in a separate press interview that rank-and-file FBI agents had lost confidence in Comey was a comment she made ‘in the heat of the moment’ that was not founded on anything.”
Appearing on CBS This Morning, Sanders was asked, if the lie was a slip of the tongue, what did she mean to say? Sanders refused to answer, instead dissembling: “Look, I’ve acknowledged that the word ‘countless’ was a slip of the tongue. But it’s no secret that a number of FBI, both current and former, agreed with the president’s decision.”
Pressed about the lie on ABC, Sanders kept repeating that the statements were made “in the heat of the moment.” George Stephanopoulos noted that she repeated the same lie twice the next day.
Obviously, comments made on consecutive days cannot be a “slip of the tongue” or due to the “heat of the moment.”
The legal significance of her lies is that Trump’s firing of Comey is a piece of a broad attempt to obstruct justice, and Sanders was engaged in an effort to craft a false cover story. Because it happened to touch on a criminal investigation, she was interviewed under oath and had to admit that she made the whole thing up. But it’s a petty fair guess that, if the FBI could interrogate Sanders upon pain of perjury about all of her claims, this would not be the only lie she would confess.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 18, 2019
Trump Beat the Rap, but Mueller Uncovered a Historic Scandal

Perhaps the most haunting passage in the special counsel’s report on Russian election interference is a fragment of a sentence, most of which is hidden behind black redaction lines. Some figure, whose name is hidden, writes to Kirill Dmitriev, a Russian regime crony, “Putin has won.”
The Mueller report is the story of a crime that succeeded and a cover-up that quite possibly did too.
Trump has repeatedly claimed, and his attorney general has repeated, that the Mueller report proved (as William Barr put it Thursday morning) “there was in fact no collusion.” Mueller’s report shows this claim of exoneration is at best highly misleading and at worst outright false.
The standard of proof used by Mueller is “establish,” which essentially means “to prove.” Mueller established both that Russia set out to help Trump’s campaign, in part by breaking American laws, and that the campaign expected to benefit from those actions, criminal and otherwise. The report states that it failed to establish “coordination,” which it defines as “more than the two parties taking actions that were informed by or responsive to the other’s actions or interests.”
And it emphasizes repeatedly that it brought charges only when prosecutors could meet that forbidding standard of proof:
As the report explains, “a statement that the investigation did not establish particular facts does not mean there was no evidence of those facts.” The failure to establish these crimes does not mean investigators proved the negative or even that they found no evidence for them.
Now, it would be unfair to Trump and his campaign to conclude that every charge that has been reported in the media or floated by Christopher Steele’s sources should be presumed true. Some avenues of the scandal appear to have been decisively foreclosed. The report flatly states that Michael Cohen did not visit Prague — one of the key disputed leads in Steele’s dossier. It produces no hints whatsoever that a server in Alfa-Bank was used to transmit campaign data between Moscow and Trump Tower. And it certainly puts to rest any possibility that Trump and Putin maintained any kind of close, regular contact throughout the campaign (though such a scenario has not received serious consideration anyway).
The report details a great deal of gross, corrupt behavior. Most important, Trump was secretly negotiating a building deal in Moscow that “stood to earn substantial sums over the lifetime of the project, without assuming significant liabilities or financing commitments.” That is to say, it was the kind of no-lose deal Putin habitually hands out to his overseas partners as a way of laundering bribes through the guise of legitimate business transactions. Legally, it’s an innocent business deal that just happens to generously offer guaranteed profits for Putin’s partner.
The report describes how Oleg Deripaska, a Russian oligarch closely tied to the regime, used Paul Manafort “to install friendly political officials in countries where Deripaska had business interests.” It shows that Manafort was indebted to Deripaska when he took on the job of managing Trump’s campaign and that Manafort passed extensive polling data on to his former employee, Konstantin Kilimnik, a Russian agent. Alas, Mueller “could not reliably determine Manafort’s purpose” in handing the data over to Kilimnik. Maybe he was giving Russians information to help target their social-media attacks, or maybe he just wanted to show what a big shot he had become.
In summer 2016, Trump appeared before television cameras and asked Russia to steal Hillary Clinton’s State Department emails (“Russia, if you’re listening …”). Trump’s defenders have tried to pass off this request as a joke, but this was always far-fetched — although Trump enjoys belittling his adversaries, he’s no ironist — and Mueller has proved the request was deadly earnest. Not only, as a previous indictment showed, did Russian hackers immediately follow up on Trump’s ask, but Trump directed Michael Flynn to get the emails.
“Trump made this request repeatedly,” notes Mueller. Flynn assigned the task to Republican operatives Barbara Ledeen and Peter W. Smith. Like every other member of the Trump campaign, neither of these figures had any compunction about teaming up with hostile states in order to gain an edge over Clinton. This second avenue of attempted collusion petered out because Mueller “did not establish” — there’s that phrase again — “that Smith was in contact with Russian hackers or that Smith, Ledeen, or other individuals in touch with the Trump Campaign ultimately obtained the deleted Clinton emails.”
A third avenue of collusion ran through WikiLeaks. This section of Mueller’s report is heavily redacted, but it makes clear that Trump’s interest in WikiLeaks was just as intense as his repeated public displays of interest would indicate. “By the late summer of 2016, the Trump Campaign was planning a press strategy, a communications campaign, and messaging based on the possible release of Clinton emails by WikiLeaks,” Mueller reports. One intriguing redacted passage offers that Trump took a phone call and “shortly after the call candidate Trump told [cooperating witness Rick] Gates that more releases of damaging information would be coming.”
The report describes four major avenues of potential collusion. Flynn’s attempt to secure the stolen emails failed. The famous Trump Tower meeting did not yield the dirt its participants sought. That leaves two more unresolved channels: Manafort, who passed polling data on to Kilimnik for reasons unknown, and Stone, who dealt with WikiLeaks and is largely blacked out of the report due to an upcoming trial.
What Stone and Manafort have in common, in addition to a long history as partners, is that they both refused to cooperate with Mueller. And here the evidence is overwhelming that Trump not only attempted to obstruct the probe but succeeded.
Trump set a tone of noncooperation that filtered down. He refused to sit for an interview, offering only written responses. Investigators complained that over 30 of these responses claimed he did not recall and other answers were “incomplete or imprecise.” Mueller’s lawyers told Trump the nonresponses “demonstrate the inadequacy of the written format.” Trump refused to offer anything more.
Trump, the report states, expressed shock that his lawyer, Don McGahn, took notes of their conversations. “I never had a lawyer who took notes,” Trump said, pointing to Roy Cohn, the former mob lawyer and aide to Joe McCarthy, as a “great” lawyer who never took notes. It is difficult to think of a reason for a lawyer not to take notes other than his client is engaged in crimes.
Several cooperating witnesses describe Trump dangling the possibility of a pardon to keep his lieutenants quiet. Cohen “discussed pardons with the President’s personal counsel and believed that if he stayed on message he would be taken care of” and was called a “rat” when he flipped. Manafort told his associate Gates “that he had talked to the President’s personal counsel and they were ‘going to take care of us.’” And Trump “privately asked advisors to pass messages to Flynn conveying that the President still cared about him and encouraging him to stay strong.”
It is famously difficult to prosecute the leaders of tight-knit criminal syndicates, which is why known mob bosses can walk the streets as celebrities for years or decades. This is the case even though there are specific laws designed to target the Mafia. Now imagine a mob boss who commands the loyalty of a national party and can hand out get-out-of-jail-free cards to his underlings when they get pinched, and you’re beginning to see the difficulty of establishing the kinds of criminal-conspiracy charges Mueller was after.
Trump’s defenders have muddled the distinction between the standard of proof required to convict a defendant in court — the standard Mueller was operating under — and the standard of proof in the court of public opinion. When you’re charged with a murder, you might beat the rap if the key witnesses recant or mysteriously die right before the trial. You would then be legally entitled to walk free, but your fellow citizens are not required to accept your boasts of exoneration. And they are certainly not required to disavow news reports that described you as a murderer.
Trump beat the rap. But Mueller’s report shows in excruciating detail the moral culpability that oozed out of the candidate and covered everybody beneath him. Pending the outcome of a couple of outstanding trials, the Russia investigation is no longer a question of law. It is a question of corruption, of ethics, of politics.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 18, 2019
Trump Deserves Impeachment. But Should the Democrats Do It?

Anyone carefully parsing the Mueller report today probably figured out at some point that, far from exonerating Donald Trump from obstruction-of-justice allegations, Mueller deemed himself (and, for that matter, William Barr in the hilariously unlikely event he was willing to go there) legally incapable of holding Trump criminally liable because of DOJ policies against charging a sitting president. He suggested indirectly but distinctly that Congress might be the only institution left that could deal with the presidential conduct that he documented but could not pursue with an indictment.
 As Yoni Applebaum put it bluntly: “The Mueller report, in short, is an impeachment referral.”
And that is why, in the howls of outrage and new determination to get to the bottom of Trump’s misconduct that you heard today from Democrats, you might have heard a quiet sigh of exasperation from House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, whose troops would be the ones to undertake the articles of impeachment.
Yes, of course, Pelosi signed a joint statement with Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer pointing out that Mueller had strengthened the case for finding Trump guilty of obstruction of justice. But she has long argued, against considerable sentiment among some of her rank-and-file members and from progressive activists at the grassroots level, that impeachment proceedings were a bad idea until and unless public support for them was so overwhelming that the Senate Republicans who would be expected to save Trump’s bacon were convinced to dump him. Mueller likely hasn’t changed the political logic of her position. Indeed, since she most clearly articulated it in March, we have gotten that much deeper into the active presidential election cycle, which makes any impeachment effort vulnerable to charges of being a partisan campaign stunt.
But make no mistake, the Mueller findings and the disgraceful manner in which Barr and the Justice Department handled them will ratchet up support for using impeachment proceedings to pick up the banner the special counsel handed them. The House leader who would presumably be in charge of impeachment proceedings, Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerrold Nadler, has been as cool to that extreme measure as Pelosi, as Roll Call reported last month:
Today Nadler struck a different tone, as Fox News reported:
But Pelosi’s chief lieutenant, Steny Hoyer, was already pouring cold water on newly boiling impeachment sentiment, as The Hill reported:
You can expect this sort of dismissal to rekindle some progressive hostility to the House Democratic leadership, already pretty high over the disrespect many believe is being shown to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Ilhan Omar. The Intercept’s Mehdi Hasan is having none of it:
At a minimum, impeachment zealots might want to wait a few days to see how the public is processing the Mueller report and its findings and consider whether there are less drastic (and ultimately futile) avenues for exploring and publicize them. Trump may well deserve impeachment, but ejecting him from office at the ballot box just over 18 months from now might be the more effective, if boringly conventional, way to proceed.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 18, 2019
On Obstruction of Justice, Mueller Punted to Congress and the Court of Public Opinion

As we all sort through the redacted version of the Mueller report, it’s increasingly apparent that for all his commendably stubborn efforts to pursue the facts, the special counsel evaded his responsibilities in one critical respect. Having assembled a host of deeply incriminating evidence of obstruction of justice by the president, he dumped the question of consequences for these acts into the laps of Congress, and ultimately, the larger public.
Mueller lets us know (directly contradicting Barr’s repeated assurances that it was lack of evidence, not the legal standard, that prevented criminal accusations) that he decided not to pursue a “traditional prosecutorial judgment” on possible obstruction of justice in order to comply with the DOJ’s position against prosecution of sitting presidents:
In a sort of Catch-22, Mueller then concluded that it wouldn’t be fair to Trump to accuse him of criminal conduct if he wasn’t going to be hauled into court and given an opportunity to properly defend himself.
And then there’s this tantalizing passage:
The footnote to the italicized portion reads:  “See U.S. CONST. Art. I § 2, cl. 5; § 3, cl. 6; cf OLC Op. at 257-258 (discussing relationship between impeachment and criminal prosecution of a sitting President).”
So very carefully Mueller is suggesting: Here’s what the president did. I can’t do anything about it, so I will not call it criminal. Use my findings to impeach him if you wish, Congress. 
As Nancy Pelosi could tell you, there are solid practical grounds for the U.S. House of Representatives to eschew impeachment proceedings, beginning with the fact that there is approximately zero chance the Republican-controlled Senate would vote to convict Trump, particularly now that we are in the active phase of a presidential election cycle. So it may well be that the best Democrats, and Trump’s other critics, can do is to take Mueller’s findings and whatever else other prosecutors or House investigators can uncover, and present it clearly as part of the case against the man’s reelection.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 18, 2019
Mitch McConnell’s Reelection Ad Is a Prolonged Boast About His Disdain for Democracy

“Let’s keep it going” is an apt slogan for Mitch McConnell’s 2020 Senate reelection campaign, given that retaining power is the only principle that anyone seems able to convincingly attribute to him. In an essay published in March by The New Republic, Alex Pareene makes a compelling case that efforts to decipher whatever grander vision motivates the Kentuckian — whether it be a commitment to conservative ideology, the survival of the Republican Party, or something else — are overthinking the matter. In McConnell’s case, Pareene argues, principle is a cover, and the GOP a vehicle, for a deceptively simple agenda: His desire to be Senate majority leader, and to enhance the financial benefits for donors and supporters who help him do so. “McConnell is the great avatar of the decades-long enclosure of our public life by money,” Pareene writes. “In Mitchworld, you simply pay — and pay, and pay — to play.”
If this is correct, the argument follows that, having accomplished his goal 12 years ago, Leader McConnell’s conduct thereafter has been unmoored from any obligation to oversee a functioning government, or a government whose actions reflect the will of most Americans, unless doing so served his ambitions. But where some might consider this a liability come election season, the senator has functionally made it the theme of his first 2020 campaign advertisement. The video, released on Wednesday, begins in March 2016, with President Obama pleading with Senate Republicans to hold hearings and vote on the confirmation of his Supreme Court nominee, Merrick Garland. McConnell refused at the time, holding the seat open in the off chance that the November election gifted him a Republican president. “Let’s let the American people decide,” McConnell says in a voiceover in the video. “Who will Americans trust to nominate the next Supreme Court justice?”
Trump’s victory and the retirement of Justice Anthony Kennedy paved the way for not one but two conservative Supreme Court nominees: Neil Gorsuch, who was confirmed with relatively little fanfare; and Brett Kavanaugh, around whom McConnell and his fellow Senate Republicans had to stubbornly close ranks amid credible — and publicly galvanizing — allegations that he sexually assaulted Christine Blasey Ford when both were in high school. He, too, now sits on the Court. “The American people decided they wanted Donald Trump to make the [nominations], not Hillary Clinton,” McConnell claims in the ad, which intercuts the drama around his SCOTUS debacles with footage of the president praising him as “powerful” and “rock-ribbed.”
The entire video is awash in irony. Its first half is dedicated to McConnell’s various perversions of the Supreme Court confirmation process and record-paced confirmations of district-court judges, while the latter half showcases two pillars of the GOP agenda since 2017: growing the economy and overhauling the tax code. (A brief nod is made also to the passage of a Farm Bill — which happens every five years — that legalized the cultivation of industrial hemp.) The economic upturn that began during the Obama presidency and continues today is welcomed by many. But the tax bill — which disproportionately benefited wealthy Americans and corporations — is broadly unpopular, according to recent Gallup polling, which found that 49 percent of Americans disapprove of it compared to 40 percent who approve. This is indicative of a bigger thread that runs throughout McConnell’s ad: The recasting of maligned and brazenly partisan Republican behavior as the will of the American people, even when it is demonstrably not.
Indeed, the majority of Americans dislike the Republican tax overhaul. The majority of Americans did not elect Donald Trump. (He won the Electoral College, but lost the popular vote to Hillary Clinton by 2.8 million votes.) Consequently, the majority of Americans did not want Trump selecting a Supreme Court nominee, then or perhaps ever. And even if they had, the same logic that McConnell used to justify the president doing so dictates that — having elected and then reelected Obama — most Americans actually wanted Trump’s Democratic predecessor to nominate a justice who would fill the late Antonin Scalia’s vacant seat in 2016. That Obama actually did make such a nomination, and McConnell refused to even grant Merrick Garland a single hearing, let alone a confirmation vote, indicates a deep lack of interest on his part in the popular will that he invokes so self-righteously in his ad. That he advertises his 2016 gambit regardless suggests that “the people” whose will he is purportedly enforcing comprise a much smaller subset of voters that the term “American people” accurately describes. Not coincidentally, McConnell himself is one of them.
None of this is surprising, though its shamelessness is disorienting. But if Pareene is correct — that the Kentuckian is “a man of pure ambition and little else” — then it makes a perverse sort of sense. If Kentucky voters want more of the same, it is to their detriment, assuming they value democracy. (McConnell’s Kentucky approval rating as of February is 33 percent, according to a Public Policy Polling survey; he won his 2014 reelection by 16 points, and no clear Democratic challenger is waiting in the wings.) But it is great news for Mitch McConnell. And really, is that not the point?
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 18, 2019
Terry McAuliffe Won’t Run for President in 2020

So the ever-expanding 2020 Democratic presidential field has lost a potential contender as former Virginia governor and DNC chairman Terry McAuliffe disclosed on CNN that he’s going to focus on helping Democrats in the Commonwealth rather than launching a White House run that he allegedly believes he could have won:
Indeed, McAuliffe gave the impression he had been lured away from the presidential campaign trail by folks back home who begged him to save their struggling party.  Characteristically, the ever-ebullient T-Mac didn’t acknowledge that despite his Beltway fame and solid record in Richmond, he was largely unknown nationally, except among progressive activists who loath him as the Clintons’ money man and the symbol of lobbyist influence in the Democratic Party.
The most recent Morning Consult tracking poll of actual and potential 2020 candidates ranked McAuliffe 18th, with 47 percent saying they’d never heard of him and another 26 percent having no opinion  of him. Aside from that problem, he seemed fundamentally mispositioned for a national party moving left and also moving beyond the turbulent Clinton legacy.
McAuliffe’s decision may also be a leading indicator that former Vice-President Joe Biden is for sure going to announce his own 2020 candidacy soon, occupying most of the “moderate lane” that might have given the Virginian some running room. It’s the sort of information McAuliffe would be in a position to obtain.
And yes, it’s true McAuliffe might have a positive impact focusing on Virginia, where the recent plague of scandals striking the party’s statewide elected leadership is threatening what looked to be very good odds of a Democratic legislative takeover this autumn, just in time for the next round of redistricting. The man may have a lot of baggage, but it doesn’t (so far as we know, and I’m sure Republicans have checked to make sure) include photos of him in blackface (like those afflicting Governor Ralph Northam and Attorney General Mark Herring) or any sexual assault allegations (like those being made against Lieutenant Governor Justin Fairfax). And if McAuliffe can make a claim of “saving” the Virginia Democratic Party, he’d be well-positioned to return to the governorship in 2021, despite earlier assumptions that Herring or Fairfax would be the next Democrat in line. The Associated Press notes this contingency:
Perhaps the 2020 Democratic field will hold the line at 18 — or 19, or 20 —contestants after all.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 18, 2019
Sarah Sanders Told Mueller She Lied to Media About Comey

In May 2017, around the time Special Counsel Robert Mueller was appointed to lead the investigation into Russian election interference, Sarah Huckabee Sanders stood at the podium in the White House’s press room and … well, apparently she lied, Mueller’s newly released report reveals.
On that day, President Donald Trump’s press secretary told the room of reporters that the White House had heard from “countless members of the FBI” who, according to her, had lost faith in former FBI director James Comey. The remark was made in the wake of Comey’s termination, and in response to a reporter’s statement that FBI staff were apparently upset to lose him. Here’s video of the moment, if you’d like to see it yourself:
And deep in Volume II of Mueller’s 400-plus-page document, the special counsel writes that Sanders admitted that this was a lie. The report reads:
According to the report, Sanders later told investigators that her comment was a “slip of the tongue,” and that a similar statement made “in the heat of the moment” was also not founded on anything. Shocking!
Lisa Ryan



Apr. 18, 2019
Mueller Report Offers More Evidence That Erik Prince Lied to Congress

Remember Blackwater Security? Iraqis do. In September 2007, the company’s mercenary fighters killed 17 civilians in Baghdad’s Nisour Square. Blackwater has changed names twice since the Nisour Square murders — it was known, briefly, as XE Services and is now called Academi — but it endures. The company’s founder, Erik Prince, has no official role with Academi, which means that he too must find new ways to remain relevant. A mercenary leader in want of a new source of profit needs allies in government, and for a while, President Donald Trump looked like a sure meal ticket. Prince’s sister, Betsy DeVos, is Trump’s secretary of Education, and Prince himself occupied a murky advisory role with the transition team.
The nature of that role just became a bit more clear. Robert Mueller’s two-year-long investigation into the Russian government’s efforts to interfere with the results of the 2016 presidential election swept up Prince, too. In 2017, as the House Intelligence Committee investigated the possibility that the Trump administration sought a communications back channel with the Russian government, Prince testified that he met with Kirill Dmitriev, the head of the Russian Direct Investment Fund, in the Seychelles. He characterized that meeting as an impromptu encounter that occurred during an unrelated business trip, as Vox reported at the time. “I didn’t fly there to meet any Russian guy,” he told lawmakers.
But Mueller’s report, which was released in redacted form on Thursday,  seems to contradict Prince’s version of events. By the time Prince met with Dmitriev, he’d already discussed the Russian businessman with George Nader, a convicted pedophile who’d reached out to members of the Trump inner circle as an emissary for Gulf states. Nader told Prince at the time that the Russians “were looking to build a link with the incoming Trump administration,” as the report put it, and sent Prince the Russian businessman’s bio along with a list of his “positive quotes about Donald Trump.” Prince went to Trump Tower the following day, and cell phone records indicate that he remained there for at least three hours, though he says he “could not recall” if he discussed Dmitriev with Steve Bannon or other members of the transition team.
But on January 7, 2017, Prince purchased a ticket to the Seychelles, where Nader was staying. On the 8th, Nader wrote to Dimitriev to tell him that he had “arranged” for Dmitriev to meet a member of the Trump transition team, a reference that, according to the report, applied to Prince. “According to Nader, Prince had led him to believe that Bannon was aware of Prince’s upcoming meeting with Dmitriev, and Prince acknowledged that it was fair for Nader to think that Prince would pass information on to the Transition Team,” the report continues. Dmitriev traveled to the Seychelles at Nader’s invitation and, on January 11, Prince met with Dmitriev.
As the report describes it, Prince’s meeting with Dmitriev does not sound like an impromptu encounter. Prince already knew that Dmitriev had been in touch with Nader, already knew that Nader wanted him to meet Dmitriev, and had, according to Nader, mentioned the meeting to other members of the transition team. The revelation will likely direct renewed scrutiny to Prince’s congressional testimony; there was already some evidence that he’d been less than truthful with his interrogators. As Mother Jones noted in March, Prince eventually admitted to attending a 2016 meeting at Trump Tower where the incoming administration’s Iran policy was a matter of discussion. Prince had told Congress that his contributions to the transition were limited, and consisted mostly of sending Bannon foreign policy papers. After revealing the discrepancy to Al Jazeera’s Mehdi Hasan in an interview, Prince basically shrugged. “I don’t know if they got the transcript wrong,” he said, referring to the official record of his testimony.
Erik Prince didn’t have a good reputation to tarnish, a fact that is occasionally obscured by the vestiges of mainstream respectability he still enjoys. The New York Times even let him publish an op-ed in 2017 laying out his case for why private contractors — who are not mercenaries, he took great pains to insist — would rescue Afghanistan from the quagmire we helped inflict on it. In the Mueller report, he is a uniquely buffoonish figure. In Nader’s telling, Dmitriev doubted that Prince was even important enough to merit a meeting. Nader responded by telling the Russian that Bannon had “designated” Prince for the meeting, and if that wasn’t good enough — well, his sister was “a Minister of Education,” a reference to Betsy DeVos. Dmitriev’s opinion of Prince didn’t improve after meeting him. According to the report, he told Nader that the Russians “needed to be communicating with someone who had more authority within the incoming administration than Prince had.” So much for all that. Maybe Prince will finally discover a form of justice he can’t evade.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 18, 2019
Congress Should Impeach William Barr

House Democrats are going to face a difficult decision about launching an impeachment inquiry into President Trump. Balanced against the president’s impressive array of misconduct is the fact that several more criminal investigations that may add to the indictment are already underway, and that impeaching the president might jeopardize the reelection of red-state Democratic members. But in the meantime, Attorney General William Barr presents them with a much easier decision. Barr has so thoroughly betrayed the values of his office that voting to impeach and remove him is almost obvious.
On March 24, Barr released a short letter summarizing the main findings of the Mueller investigation, as he saw them. News accounts treated Barr’s interpretation as definitive, and the media — even outlets that had spent two years uncovering a wide swath of suspicious and compromising links between the Trump campaign and Russia — dutifully engaged in self-flagellation for having had the temerity to raise questions about the whole affair.
Barr had done very little to that point to earn such a broad benefit of the doubt. In the same role in 1992, he had supported mass pardons of senior officials that enabled a cover-up of the Iran–Contra scandal. Less famously, in 1989 he issued a redacted version of a highly controversial administration legal opinion that, as Ryan Goodman explained, “omitted some of the most consequential and incendiary conclusions from the actual opinion” for “no justifiable reason.”
And while many members of the old Republican political Establishment had recoiled against Trump’s contempt for the rule of law, Barr has shown no signs of having joined them. He met with Trump to discuss serving as his defense lawyer, publicly attacked the Mueller investigation (which risked “taking on the look of an entirely political operation to overthrow the president”), called for more investigations of Hillary Clinton, and circulated a lengthy memo strongly defending Trump against obstruction charges.
The events since Barr’s letter have incinerated whatever remains of his credibility. The famously tight-lipped Mueller team told several news outlets the letter had minimized Trump’s culpability; Barr gave congressional testimony hyping up Trump’s charges of “spying,” even prejudging the outcome of an investigation (“I think there was a failure among a group of leaders [at the FBI] at the upper echelon”); evaded questions as to whether he had shared the Mueller report with the White House; and, it turns out, he’s “had numerous conversations with White House lawyers which aided the president’s legal team,” the New York Times reports. Then he broke precedent by scheduling a press conference to spin the report in advance of its redacted publication.
It is not much of a mystery to determine which officials have offered their full loyalty to the president. Trump has reportedly “praised Barr privately for his handling of the report and compared him favorably to former Attorney General Jeff Sessions” —whose sole offense in Trump’s eyes was following Department of Justice ethical protocol. Trump urged his Twitter followers to tune in to Barr’s conference, promotional treatment he normally reserves for his Fox News sycophants.
The press conference was the final disqualifying performance. Barr acted like Trump’s defense lawyer, the job he had initially sought, rather than as an attorney general. His aggressive spin seemed designed to work in the maximal number of repetitions of the “no collusion” mantra, in accordance with his boss’s talking points, at the expense of any faithful transmission of the special counsel’s report.
Barr’s letter had made it sound as though Trump’s campaign spurned Russia’s offers of help: “The Special Counsel did not find that the Trump campaign, or anyone associated with it, conspired or coordinated with the Russian government in these efforts, despite multiple offers from Russian-affiliated individuals to assist the Trump campaign,” he wrote. In fact, Mueller’s report concluded, “In some instances, the Campaign was receptive to the offer,” but that the cooperation fell short of criminal conduct.
Where Mueller intended to leave the job of judging Trump’s obstructive conduct to Congress, Barr interposed his own judgment. Barr offered this incredible statement for why Trump’s behavior was excusable: “[T]here is substantial evidence to show that the President was frustrated and angered by a sincere belief that the investigation was undermining his presidency, propelled by his political opponents, and fueled by illegal leaks,” Barr said. “Nonetheless, the White House fully cooperated with the Special Counsel’s investigation,” and credited him further with taking “no act that in fact deprived the Special Counsel of the documents and witnesses necessary to complete his investigation.”
Sincere? How can Barr use that word to describe the mentality of a man whose own staffers routinely describe him in the media as a pathological liar? Trump repeatedly lied about Russia’s involvement in the campaign, and his own dealings with Russia. And he also, contra Barr, repeatedly denied the special counsel access to witnesses by dangling pardons to persuade them to withhold cooperation.
It is true that many of Trump’s attempts to obstruct justice failed. As Mueller wrote, the president’s “efforts to influence the investigation were mostly unsuccessful, but that is largely because the persons who surrounded the President declined to carry out orders or accede to his requests.”
This is a rather different gloss on the facts than the happy story Barr offered the press. What’s more, it is a pressing argument for Barr’s own removal. Next to the president himself, the attorney general is the most crucial actor in the safeguarding of the rule of law. The Justice Department is an awesome force that holds the power to enable the ruling party to commit crimes with impunity, or to intimidate and smear the opposing party with the taint of criminality.
There is no other department in government in which mere norms, not laws, are all that stand between democracy as we know it and a banana republic. Barr has revealed his complete unfitness for this awesome task. Nearly two more years of this Trumpian henchman wielding power over federal law enforcement is more weight than the rickety Constitution can bear.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 18, 2019
Mueller Report Confirms Trump Runs the White House Like It’s the Mafia

Donald Trump is running the American government like a business – or, if we’re being precise, like a criminal enterprise.
The president’s penchant for asking himself, “What would Roy Cohn advise John Gotti to do?” has been clear for some time. Last August, Trump said of the possibility that Michael Cohen would cooperate with Robert Mueller’s investigation, “I know all about flipping. It should almost be illegal.” Around that same time, the president insisted that his White House counsel, Don McGahn, was not a “a John Dean type ‘RAT’” — a reference to President Nixon’s lawyer, who testified (truthfully) about his boss’s attempts to obstruct justice. And Trump has repeatedly argued that the U.S. attorney general’s primary responsibility is to demonstrate unflinching loyalty to the president, as though the federal government was the Mafia and Trump its godfather.
Thus, Robert Mueller’s investigation was never going to reveal that the leader of the free world thinks like a mobster, as that was something we already knew. Nevertheless, the special counsel’s report does confirm that fact by detailing three previously unreported instances in which the president’s behavior was indistinguishable from that of a mafioso:
In June 2017, Trump directed Don McGahn to have Robert Mueller fired. McGahn then let it be known that he would resign before carrying out such an order.
By the following January, the New York Times had gotten wind of that conversation. And when the paper’s story hit newsstands, Trump ordered McGahn to dispute the report. McGahn refused. In a tense Oval Office meeting, Trump further pressured the White House counsel to dispute the Times story — and then asked McGahn about his recent conversations with Mueller’s office. A very mobster-esque exchange ensued:
In June 2017, Trump learned of the existence of the (now infamous) emails in which his eldest son arranged a meeting with purported Russian operatives at Trump Tower the previous summer (“If it’s what you say I love it”). Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner then tried to fill in the president on documents ostensibly related to that meeting. Trump demurred:
In November 2017, Trump’s former national security adviser Michael Flynn started cooperating with the special counsel, and withdrew from a joint defense agreement he’d struck with the president. Hours after Trump learned of Flynn’s decision, his personal lawyer left a voice-mail for Flynn’s counsel:
Flynn’s counsel then informed the president’s attorney that it could not provide Trump with such a “heads up.” Trump’s counsel responded by warning that he would inform the boss of Flynn’s “hostility.”
These anecdotes do not prove that Trump committed obstruction of justice, much less that he participated in a criminal conspiracy with the Russian government. But, assuming that we all agree the American government should not be run like a criminal business, these excerpts alone establish that Congress should not allow Donald Trump to continue being president.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 18, 2019
The 11 Areas of Possible Obstruction of Justice Mueller Investigated

Beyond the bland assertions from William Barr (in his March 24 “summary of principal findings” letter and his press conference today) that Robert Mueller found no actionable incidents where the president committed a criminal obstruction of justice are the actual incidents the report details and Mueller’s own findings of fact about what Trump did. In themselves, these findings raise some troubling questions that cannot simply be swept under the rug, much less answered with sweeping assertions of a fictional “exoneration.” Mueller examined 11 incidents, which I have labeled descriptively; quotes from Mueller’s summary of the facts follow each heading.
1. Trump campaign denies Russian connections.
“After WikiLeaks released politically damaging Democratic Party emails that were reported to have been hacked by Russia, Trump publicly expressed skepticism that Russia was responsible for the hacks … Trump also denied having any business in or connections to Russia, even though as late as June 2016 the Trump Organization had been pursuing a licensing deal for a skyscraper to be built in Russia called Trump Tower Moscow. After the election, the President expressed concerns to advisors that reports of Russia’s election interference might lead the public to question the legitimacy of his election.”
2. Trump asks Comey for “loyalty,” and then to go easy on Michael Flynn.
“On January 27, the day after the President was told that Flynn had lied to the Vice President and had made similar statements to the FBI, the President invited FBI Director Comey to a private dinner at the White House and told Comey that he needed loyalty. On February 14, the day after the President requested Flynn’s resignation, the President told an outside advisor, ‘Now that we fired Flynn, the Russia thing is over’ …
“Later that afternoon, the President cleared the Oval Office to have a one-on-one meeting with Comey. Referring to the FBI’s investigation of Flynn, the President said, ‘I hope you can see your way clear to letting this go, to letting Flynn go. He is a good guy. I hope you can let this go.’”
3. Trump rages against Sessions’s recusal, and puts even more pressure on Comey. 
“In early March, the President told White House Counsel Donald McGahn to stop Sessions from recusing. And after Sessions announced his recusal on March 2, the President expressed anger at the decision and told advisors that he should have an Attorney General who would protect him. That weekend, the President took Sessions aside at an event and urged him to ‘unrecuse’ …
“[T]he President reached out to the Director of National Intelligence and the leaders of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the National Security Agency (NSA) to ask them what they could do to publicly dispel the suggestion that the President had any connection to the Russian election-interference effort.
“The President also twice called Comey directly, notwithstanding guidance from McGahn to avoid direct contacts with the Department of Justice.”
4. Trump fires Comey.
“The day of the firing, the White House maintained that Comey’s termination resulted from independent recommendations from the Attorney General and Deputy Attorney General that Comey should be discharged for mishandling the Hillary Clinton email investigation. But the President had decided to fire Comey before hearing from the Department of Justice. The day after firing Comey, the President told Russian officials that he had ‘faced great pressure because of Russia,’ which had been ‘taken off’ by Comey’s firing. The next day, the President acknowledged in a television interview that he was going to fire Comey regardless of the Department of Justice’s recommendation and that when he ‘decided to just do it,’ he was thinking that ‘this thing with Trump and Russia is a made-up story.’”
5. Trump freaks out over Mueller’s appointment and tries to quash it.
 “The President reacted to news that a Special Counsel had been appointed by telling advisors that it was ‘the end of his presidency’ and demanding that Sessions resign. Sessions submitted his resignation, but the President ultimately did not accept it. The President told aides that the Special Counsel had conflicts of interest and suggested that the Special Counsel therefore could not serve.
“On June 14, 2017, the media reported that the Special Counsel’s Office was investigating whether the President had obstructed justice … The President reacted to this news with a series of tweets criticizing the Department of Justice and the Special Counsel’s investigation. On June 17, 2017, the President called McGahn at home and directed him to call the Acting Attorney General and say that the Special Counsel had conflicts of interest and must be removed. McGahn did not carry out the direction, however, deciding that he would resign rather than trigger what he regarded as a potential Saturday Night Massacre.”
6. Trump tries to stop Mueller’s investigation.
“On June 19, 2017, the President met one-on-one in the Oval Office with his former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, a trusted advisor outside the government, and dictated a message for Lewandowski to deliver to Sessions. The message said that Sessions should publicly announce that, notwithstanding his recusal from the Russia investigation, the investigation was “very unfair” to the President, the President had done nothing wrong, and Sessions planned to meet with the Special Counsel and ‘let [him] move forward with investigating election meddling for future elections.’
“One month later, in another private meeting with Lewandowski on July 19, 2017, the President asked about the status of his message for Sessions to limit the Special Counsel investigation to future election interference. Lewandowski told the President that the message would be delivered soon … Lewandowski did not want to deliver the President’s message personally, so he asked senior White House official Rick Dearborn to deliver it to Sessions. Dearborn was uncomfortable with the task and did not follow through.”
7. Trump suppresses information on Trump Tower meeting with a Russian agent.
“On several occasions, the President directed aides not to publicly disclose the emails setting up the June 9 meeting, suggesting that the emails would not leak and that the number of lawyers with access to them should be limited. Before the emails became public, the President edited a press statement for Trump Jr. by deleting a line that acknowledged that the meeting was with ‘an individual who [Trump Jr.] was told might have information helpful to the campaign’ and instead said only that the meeting was about adoptions of Russian children. When the press asked questions about the President’s involvement in Trump Jr.’s statement, the President’s personal lawyer repeatedly denied the President had played any role.”
8. Trump again pressures Sessions to un-recuse and get control of Mueller.
“In early summer 2017, the President called Sessions at home and again asked him to reverse his recusal from the Russia investigation. Sessions did not reverse his recusal. In October 2017, the President met privately with Sessions in the Oval Office and asked him to ‘take [a] look’ at investigating Clinton. In December 2017, shortly after Flynn pleaded guilty pursuant to a cooperation agreement, the President met with Sessions in the Oval Office and suggested, according to notes taken by a senior advisor, that if Sessions unrecused and took back supervision of the Russia investigation, he would be a ‘hero.’”
9. Trump orders Don McGahn to lie about earlier efforts to fire Mueller.
” In early 2018, the press reported that the President had directed McGahn to have the Special Counsel removed in June 2017 and that McGahn had threatened to resign rather than carry out the order. The President reacted to the news stories by directing White House officials to tell McGahn to dispute the story and create a record stating he had not been ordered to have the Special Counsel removed.”
10. Trump tries to flatter and perhaps bribe Flynn and Manafort.
“After Flynn withdrew from a joint defense agreement with the President and began cooperating with the government, the President’s personal counsel left a message for Flynn’s attorneys reminding them of the President’s warm feelings towards Flynn, which he said ‘still remains,’ and asking for a ‘heads up’ if Flynn knew ‘information that implicates the President’ … During Manafort’s prosecution and when the jury in his criminal trial was deliberating, the President praised Manafort in public, said that Manafort was being treated unfairly, and declined to rule out a pardon. After Manafort was convicted, the President called Manafort ‘a brave man’ for refusing to ‘break’ and said that ‘flipping almost ought to be outlawed.’”
11. Trump tries to intimidate Michael Cohen.
“The President’s conduct towards Michael Cohen, a former Trump Organization executive, changed from praise for Cohen when he falsely minimized the President’s involvement in the Trump Tower Moscow project, to castigation of Cohen when he became a cooperating witness …
“[A]fter Cohen began cooperating with the government in the summer of 2018, the President publicly criticized him, called him a ‘rat,’ and suggested that his family members had committed crimes.”
Mueller’s indecision involving the criminal liability properly attached to these incidents is another matter — which of course Barr and Trump and the GOP are frantically spinning as exoneration. But ask yourself if any of these bizarre moments in the Trump campaign and presidency show a man with clean hands and a clear conscience. That should matter to the American people in 2020.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 18, 2019
Mueller Report: Trump Said ‘I’m F***ed’ When Special Counsel Was Appointed

Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s redacted report on the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election was released on Thursday. (If you have several hours to kill, you can read the 400-plus-page, two-part document for yourself here.) Deep into the report — on page 78 of Volume II, to be exact — may just be the best passage of the entire document: the moment Trump admits he’s fucked.
In that section, Mueller revealed how Trump reacted to (unblinking) Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein’s May 2017 announcement that Mueller had been appointed to lead the special counsel. “Oh my God. This is terrible. This is the end of my Presidency. I’m fucked,” Trump said when he was informed of the news by now-former Attorney General Jeff Sessions, according to the report. For a president who sees himself as above the law, admitting that he’s “fucked” certainly isn’t a promise that he is — but it is nevertheless satisfying to hear him acknowledge that he’s not unimpeachable. We’ll revel in that moment for a while.
Done reveling, we will now resume. This exchange was found in notes kept by Sessions’s chief of staff Jody Hunt. The president then “slumped back in his chair” in the Oval Office, per the report, and reportedly became “angry.” He is said to have “lambasted” Sessions for recusing himself from the investigation in the first place. “How could you let this happen, Jeff?” he reportedly asked. The report notes that Sessions recalls Trump also saying, “‘You were supposed to protect me,’ or words to that effect.” Per the report:
Here’s hoping.
Lisa Ryan



Apr. 18, 2019
White Alabamians Are Trying It Again

A familiar name tops early polling for the 2020 U.S. Senate race in Alabama: Roy Moore, the former prosecutor and one-time chief justice of the state Supreme Court, who was defeated for the same office in a special election in 2017. According to results published on Tuesday by Mason-Dixon Polling & Strategy, 27 percent of Alabama Republicans would vote for Moore were the GOP primary held today — the highest rate of any potential candidate. (The runner-up, Mo Brooks, sits at 18 percent, with 25 percent of respondents undecided.)
There is little to recommend Moore as either a political candidate or as a person. He surrendered one of Alabama’s two solidly red U.S. Senate seats to a Democrat, Doug Jones, for the first time since 1992. His top donor is a neo-Confederate; he was a leading voice in the “birther” movement aimed at discrediting Barack Obama by claiming that he was born in Kenya; he once compared Keith Ellison swearing in to Congress on the Qu’ran to a hypothetical official in 1943 swearing in on Mein Kampf by Adolf Hitler; and he has blamed America’s purportedly permissive attitude toward abortion and anal sex — in alleged defiance of God’s will — for violent tragedies ranging from the 9/11 terrorist attacks to mass shootings.
Perhaps the best-known fact about Moore, though, is that he is an accused child predator. At least four women have alleged that he pursued them for sexual relationships when they were between the ages of 14 and 17 and he was in his 30s. (The age of consent in Alabama, then and now, is 16.) Three claimed that he kissed them. One said that Moore touched her through her bra and underpants and guided her hand to touch his erect penis. She was 14. Another, who was 15 at the time, said that he sexually assaulted her in the back of a car, groping her breasts and locking the doors when she tried to escape. Four other women have alleged that Moore assaulted them when they were 18 or older.
Despite these allegations — which Moore denies — the Republican lost the 2017 election by less than two points. His success relative to his deficiencies is attributable to the overwhelming support of white Alabama voters, who backed him at a rate of 68 percent. (Roughly the same share of white voters in the state are registered Republicans; 96 percent of black voters, on the other hand, backed Moore’s opponent, now-Senator Jones, effectively handing him the election.) President Trump endorsed Moore in the general, after his preferred candidate, Luther Strange, lost the GOP primary, while the Republican National Committee buttressed his campaign financially. All told, the racial chasm that marked Moore’s near-victory is unavoidable. Had most white Alabamians and national Republicans had their way, an unhinged zealot, conspiracist, and alleged child molester would be casting votes in the Senate today.
It is hard to fathom being black in Alabama and witnessing this unfold. The history of the franchise in the state is defined largely by the struggles that black people have waged to secure it for themselves, most famously during the civil-rights era. They pursued these efforts, certainly, to enforce the laws and proclamations that had promised, but never fully realized, their citizenship and its attendant rights. But in more specific and practical terms, they also did so to thwart white efforts to send violent segregationists and reprobates to Alabama’s local governments, sheriff’s departments, state capitol, or to Capitol Hill to represent them nationally.
These struggles were often bloody. Black-led civil-rights activities were met by violent and sometimes fatal attacks, claiming as casualties black and white activists alike. Reverend James Reeb, Viola Liuzzo, and Jonathan Daniels were three white Northerners who were killed while assisting voting-rights efforts in Selma, on the Selma Highway, and in Hayneville, respectively. Jimmie Lee Jackson, a 26-year-old black man, was beaten and shot by white state troopers in 1965 in Marion while protecting his grandmother and grandfather – who were protesting for their right to vote — from the troopers’ violent crackdowns. A man serving in Congress today, Representative John Lewis of Georgia’s Fifth District, was tear-gassed and beaten by state troopers the following month while attempting to march, with hundreds of others, from Selma to Montgomery to demand black voting rights. His skull was fractured in the process. All were brutalized or killed under the watchful eye of Governor George Wallace, a staunch defender of Jim Crow who proclaimed infamously in his 1963 inaugural address, “[Segregation] now, segregation tomorrow, and segregation forever,” and six months later stood in the doorway of the University of Alabama’s Foster Auditorium to block two black students — Vivian Malone and James Hood — from enrolling in the school.
It cannot have shocked black Alabamians that half a century later, so many of their white counterparts would still be trying to vote amoral bigots into positions of political power. But predictability cannot dull its sting. The partisan zealotry that allowed Republican voters to overlook at best, or at worst, endorse Moore’s conduct in the name of keeping Alabama red in 2017 will always be a national stain. But that enough are willing to try again two years later — and at high enough rates to give Moore an early polling edge — sours whatever sense of victory Jones’s election might have elicited. The Democrat is vulnerable, as evidenced by the same pollster showing that just 40 percent of respondents would back his reelection. Whoever the Republican nominee ends up being seems an odds-on favorite to win Jones’s seat. It does not have to be Moore, and time will tell whether his lead holds. But either way, the Alabamians seeking to move their state forward deserve better.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 18, 2019
William Barr: Trump’s Obstruction Was Legal Because He Was Sincerely Paranoid

Russia’s decision to interfere in the 2016 election did not prompt Robert Mueller’s investigation. Donald Trump’s decision to fire James Comey — after asking the FBI director to pledge personal loyalty to him, and then to demonstrate such loyalty by dropping an investigation into his national-security adviser Michael Flynn — triggered the special counsel’s appointment. Which is to say: The Mueller report exists because Trump gave the public reason to fear that he was trying to compromise the independence of the Justice Department.
And on Thursday, Attorney General William Barr confirmed that those fears were well founded and that Trump’s bid to turn federal law enforcement into an arm of his White House has been a smashing success.
At a press conference shortly before the Mueller report’s release, Barr comported himself as a public-relations operative, repeating the president’s “no collusion” catchphrase multiple times, claiming that Mueller’s investigation had proved that Trump’s associates did not cooperate in Russian computer crimes (when the actual report merely said that “the evidence was not sufficient to support criminal charges”) and suggesting that the sensationalist media bore some responsibility for Trump’s myriad efforts to undermine a federal investigation.
More specifically, Barr argued that Trump’s firing of Comey, along with the other instances of meddling Mueller identified, did not qualify as obstruction of justice — because the president sincerely believed that the investigation he was quashing was a baseless witch hunt launched by his political enemies. He further implied that the media’s irresponsible, “relentless speculation” validated Trump’s view:
In these remarks, Barr suggests that the Mueller report vindicated Trump’s frustration with media coverage of Russian interference in the early days of his presidency. And yet, during that time period, Trump’s public criticisms of the Russia investigation were not based exclusively on denials of collusion. Rather, he repeatedly claimed that no Russian interference of any kind had occurred. His transition team released a statement rejecting the intelligence agencies’ analysis that the Russian government had intervened, saying, “These are the same people that said Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.” Throughout his first months in office, the president repeatedly derided the notion that Russia had interfered as a “Democrat EXCUSE.”
Yet, as the news media reported from the beginning, there was in fact Russian interference. Nevertheless, Barr worded his statement to convey the impression that Mueller had vindicated the president’s frustration and discredited the media. This is not how a disinterested, independent law-enforcement official behaves.
Barr’s actual legal reasoning is a bit more defensible. In order to prove obstruction of justice, the state must establish that an individual undermined an investigation with a “corrupt intent.” Barr’s argument is, in essence, that the president did not act with a corrupt intent because he was sincerely subject to the paranoid delusion that the FBI’s investigation into Russian interference — and his campaign’s potential ties to it — was an inquisition orchestrated by his political enemies. And there’s nothing corrupt about trying to shut down a witch hunt.
Of course, the fact that Mueller did not find sufficient evidence to charge the Trump campaign with criminal acts of collusion does not in any way validate the president’s perception of persecution. Trump publicly encouraged Russia to hack Clinton’s emails during the 2016 campaign. He then repeatedly disparaged his own CIA for suggesting that Russian interference had occurred. There was an unambiguous basis for conducting a counterintelligence investigation (something Republicans at the time did not dispute). Therefore, if we accept Barr’s reasoning, Trump’s intentions were pure because he is so earnestly paranoid and narcissistic he was incapable of entertaining any explanation for the Russia investigation’s existence that did not involve a nefarious conspiracy hatched by his enemies.
This assessment is itself dubious. But it is true that proving beyond a reasonable doubt that this president is not subject to paranoid delusions would be difficult.
Making the case that Congress should not allow a paranoid, delusional man to retain command of the world’s largest nuclear arsenal seems like an easier task.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 18, 2019
Read the Full Mueller Report Document

Thursday’s release of a version of Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference with the 2016 presidential election and the possible complicity of members of the Trump campaign is the climax of months of speculation.
The release of the 400-page report comes after Attorney General William Barr’s summary, which absolved the president and his campaign from charges that they colluded with Russian’s campaign of interference.
Intelligencer Staff



Apr. 18, 2019
Barr Confirms White House Got a Sneak Peek at the Mueller Report

So one mystery involving the rollout of the Mueller report was definitively laid to rest by Attorney General William Barr in his spin fest of a press conference this morning. During congressional testimony on April 9, Barr got cagey and avoided questions about whether the White House would get a sneak peak at the full report.
Today he confirmed they did, though he only made that disclosure after throwing a little sand in our eyes by insisting that the unredacted report was only viewed by “Department of Justice attorneys working closely together with attorneys from the Special Counsel’s Office, as well as with the intelligence community, and prosecutors who are handling ongoing cases.” 
In the next breath, Barr admitted that White House attorneys and Trump’s personal lawyers got exclusive access to the redacted report — i.e., the report that Congress and the rest of us will see later today — at some unspecified earlier time (though apparently the personal Trump lawyers got their sneak peak “earlier this week”).
Barr rationalized these advance disclosures to the White House as necessary to determine whether additional redactions based on executive privilege were necessary (they weren’t), and to Trump lawyers as part of traditional practice when government officials are investigated by an independent counsel.
These assurances might have been effective without the context of the massive spin effort Barr and the administration have orchestrated to influence public perceptions of Mueller’s investigation and findings. These include the strange “summary of principal findings” that Barr issued for no particular reason on March 24; the heavy White House–orchestrated campaign to claim a complete exoneration that Mueller himself did not offer; and indeed, today’s remarkable presser in which Barr ran interference for his boss, enabling Trump and his allies to begin a belligerent campaign to demand a shift in attention to some future investigation of alleged Democratic “crimes.”
Barr has clearly worked hand in glove with other Trump hirelings to encourage the most positive public reaction to the report before the public or its elected representatives saw it. It will be interesting to see why they deemed this egregious exercise of partisanship so necessary.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 18, 2019
Who Was the Bearded Man at the Barr Press Conference?

At a Thursday morning press conference on the Mueller report’s impending release, Attorney General William Barr offered an effusive absolution of President Donald Trump. The entire exercise felt more like public relations than fair-minded legal analysis, and Barr’s conclusions will likely contribute to existing perceptions that the Department of Justice is essentially working for Trump. But Barr didn’t work alone, and as public scrutiny inevitably fixes on him in the aftermath of today’s events, he may share the hot seat with the two individuals who joined him for Thursday’s briefing. One, Rod Rosenstein, is somewhat familiar to the public as the department’s deputy attorney general. His bearded neighbor is not as well known. He’s Edward O’Callaghan, a former assistant U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, who joined the Department of Justice earlier this month as a principal associate deputy attorney general.
O’Callaghan’s career reveals a firm commitment to the Republican Party. As Newsweek reported, O’Callaghan previously worked for the 2008 presidential campaign of the late Senator John McCain. In that capacity, he traveled to Alaska to intervene in a state investigation into Sarah Palin, then the state’s governor and McCain’s running mate. Palin faced an ethics probe into her suspicious termination of the state’s Department of Public Safety Commissioner, Walt Monegan; Monegan had reportedly refused to fire a state trooper who happened to be the ex-husband of Palin’s sister. According to Newsweek, O’Callaghan worked with Palin aide Meghan Stapleton to try to defuse the investigation.
“Stapleton and this guy did almost daily press conferences to discredit the investigation,” Hollis French, an Alaska legislator, told Newsweek. “She was the face Alaskans would recognize. Others would have no idea who this attorney was standing next to her.” Les Gara, a serving Democratic state legislator, told the magazine that O’Callaghan and Stapleton made the investigation “look like a Democratic attack against Palin.” Sounds familiar!
Sarah Jones



Apr. 17, 2019
Poll: 12 Percent of Americans Have ‘Never Heard’ of Mike Pence

Unlike the last Republican to hold the position, Mike Pence isn’t the most policy-driven vice-president, choosing instead to take care of diplomatic tasks and gleam aspirationally at the president’s broad shoulders. But a new CNN poll that finds that 12 percent of Americans have “never heard” of him still seems a little low for the man who is second in line to become the president. As Newsweek notes, that equates to over 30 million adults who don’t recognize Pence’s name.
The poll seems to affirm just how many Americans have fully opted out of political life, and it’s possible that the number could still fall short of determining just how many Americans don’t know their veep. Twelve percent is the number of people who have “never heard” of him after saying his name — to ask “Who is the vice-president?” or “Who is Mike Pence?” would likely bring in more shrugs. Of those who did recognize Pence’s name, 40 percent said they had an “unfavorable opinion” him and 39 percent claimed a “favorable opinion.”
Pence is not the most publicly present vice-president in modern history. “He likes to be out,” a longtime aide told the Atlantic last August, referring to the vice-president’s habit of avoiding commenting on the never-ending stream of administration scandals. Still, Pence’s level of recognition isn’t a major departure from prior years’ polling: Since taking office, the “never heard” of him mark has held steady around 10 percent. And Pence appears to be doing better than his predecessor. In 2014, when Newsweek polled 1,000 people with questions from the American-citizenship test, less than 29 percent could name Joe Biden as the sitting vice-president.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 17, 2019
Everything You Need to Know About the Mueller Report’s Release

On the evening before the public release of the redacted findings of the Mueller investigation, reports emerged that Justice Department officials have had several conversations with White House lawyers, helping President Trump’s legal team to prepare a rebuttal, and his PR team to plan counter-programming against the coming media frenzy.
Barr Will Release Report After Thursday Morning Press Conference
In an effort of questionable logic — or just a last-ditch endeavor to stall for time — Attorney General William Barr will hold a press conference Thursday morning at 9:30 a.m., then release the report to Congress somewhere between 11 a.m. and noon. If this timeline, as presented by Representative Jerry Nadler, is confirmed, reporters will be asking Barr about a 300-page report they haven’t yet seen, let alone taken the time to digest.
The Report Will Be Lightly Redacted
According to the Washington Post, the report will be “lightly redacted,” offering “detailed blow-by-blow of his alleged conduct — analyzing tweets, private threats and other episodes at the center of Mueller’s inquiry, they added.”
Barr Cements Reputation as Trump’s Fixer
That President Trump received an advance notice to aide his legal and P.R. teams infuriated critics who already claim that Barr’s handling of the Mueller report summary and no-call on obstruction of justice were issued in favor of the president. Thursday’s irregular timeline for Barr’s conference and the Mueller release certainly doesn’t help that appearance.
“He has demonstrated that he understands loyalty to the president, rather than an oath to the Constitution,” Rhode Island Congressman David Cicilline told the New York Times. “The president said, ‘I want to have my own Roy Cohn,’ and he may have found him.”
Leaks Are Coming (Probably)
Another piece of Mueller news dropped on Wednesday evening — one that could alleviate the frustration of report readers stymied by big redacted blocks in Thursday’s reading. According to NBC News, after the redacted version of the report is released to the public, the Justice Department intends to allow “a limited number of members of Congress and their staff” to review a version of the report “without certain redactions.”
Of course, “certain redactions” is an extremely ambiguous phrase, one that will most likely be clarified by Democratic members of Congress upon their review. Also possible from those same members of Congress: leaks of the less-redacted report.
﻿Mueller Will Almost Certainly Be Subpoenaed
In a very brief news conference on Thursday evening, House Judiciary Chairman Jerry Nadler called William Barr’s actions “cherry picking” and that the AG has “baked in a narrative about the report to the benefit of the White House.” As a consequence, Nadler told reporters that his committee will subpoena special counsel Mueller and members of his team in “very short order,” assuming that the report is not light on redactions.
How to Read the Report
According to BuzzFeed News reporter Zoe Tillman, the report will be sent to Congress on CDs, an interesting medium for what is presumably a text file or PDF. For the rest of us, the Mueller report will be posted on the special counsel website after it’s sent to Congress — although there still isn’t a time for the public release.
This is a developing story. Please check back for updates.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 17, 2019
Note to John Bolton: ‘Three Stooges of Socialism’ Is Not a Terrifying Allusion

As his contribution to the Trump administration/GOP Red Scare of 2019–2020, White House national security adviser John Bolton gave a fiery speech to a group of aging Cuban-American veterans of the failed 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, and brought back many memories of those wonderful days of the Cold War. Some of his lines were a bit jarring, truth be told, as Politico’s report indicates:
The whole idea of the Monroe Doctrine, of course, was for the United States to resist Eastern Hemisphere (originally Western European) interference with Latin America, a concept that was made ideological when Cuba was a Soviet client state and the Russkies were fomenting revolution elsewhere. Yes, today’s Russia supports Venezuela’s Maduro, Nicaragua’s Ortega, and (not so warmly any more) Cuba’s Díaz-Canel, perhaps for old time’s sake. But it’s not as though it does so as the representative of any sinister (much less Marxist) scheme to subvert the hemisphere, unless neo-Tsarism has a future here, in which case Bolsonaro’s Brazil (which Bolton has lavishly praised) and his friend Trump’s USA are the most likely prospects.
In any event, rattling the old Cold War hobgoblins fits in with the administration’s foreign policy and domestic politics, so Bolton was given free rein to twist and shout: “In all, Bolton announced seven crackdowns and sanctions targeting the governments in Cuba, Venezuela and Nicaragua,” reported Politico.
He also brought back some contemptuous lines about Maduro, Ortega, and Díaz-Canel as the “troika of tyranny” that he deployed in an earlier South Florida speech last year. “Troika” has a nice Russian ring to it, but seemed a bit derivative of George W. Bush’s famous “axis of evil” (referring to that era’s Republican demon-figures of Iraq, Iran, and North Korea). But another nickname he had for the three leaders is palpably counterproductive: “the three stooges of socialism.”
Someone needs to explain to Bolton and/or his speechwriter that “the Three Stooges” is not an allusion likely to strike fear into the hearts of good patriotic Americans fearing the theft of their priceless heritage of freedom. Perhaps if he wants to make fun of the three leaders, he could compare them to Larry, Moe, and Curly Joe, but the comedians were by no means a “troika of tyranny.”
Rhetorical logic aside, Bolton and his boss are in danger of arousing expectations about Latin America that they may not be willing to meet:
I’m not sure how reviving the specter of yanqui imperialism comports with Trump’s America (meaning strictly God’s Country, the USA) First posture with its noninterventionist subtext. But apparently if it’s useful in keeping Florida in Trump’s column in 2020, the ends justifies the means.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 17, 2019
Pete Buttigieg Is Already Facing Anti-Gay Harassment on the Campaign Trail

When the U.S. Supreme Court overturned state bans on same-sex marriage in 2015, conservative Christians predicted ruin. The Obama administration would round up pastors who refused to perform same-sex weddings. Churches would be forced to host the ceremonies. Faithful Christians would become social outcasts. None of that happened, of course, but urban legends are notoriously resilient beasts.
So perhaps protests targeting the presidential campaign of Pete Buttigieg, the openly gay mayor of South Bend, Indiana, were inevitable. Buttigieg isn’t the first openly gay candidate for president — that distinction belongs to Fred Karger, who ran unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination in 2012. But Buttigieg is arguably the most prominent gay candidate, and he is the first to run while married to another man. His candidacy will likely reveal either the strengths or the limitations of the nation’s professed tolerance for LGBT people.
More Americans support marriage equality than ever before: 75 percent believe gay and lesbian relationships should be legal, Gallup reported in 2019. But 23 percent disagreed, and while they’re a minority, they still constitute a relatively significant base of opposition to a basic civil right for LGBT people. To them, Buttigieg’s candidacy is another harbinger of doom. Buttigieg’s “relationship is not marriage,” the National Organization for Marriage’s Brian Brown claimed earlier this month.
On Wednesday, these attacks on Buttigieg escalated when a trio of activists, dressed as Satan, Jesus, and the mayor himself, showed up to protest the candidate’s Iowa campaign stops. CNN’s Dan Merica identified one of the men as Randall Terry.
Terry’s appearance at the Buttigieg rally invokes a specific, violent history. Once a used-car salesman, Terry is a radical anti-abortion activist. He founded Operation Rescue, an extremist organization with long-standing ties to the most violent factions of the anti-abortion movement. Under Terry’s guidance, the organization adopted dramatic tactics. Members blockaded clinics to physically prevent patients from entering the buildings; in 1989, Rolling Stone reported that police made 30,000 arrests connected to clinic “rescues” in two years. The organization’s senior vice-president, Cheryl Sullenger, served two years in federal prison for attempting to bomb an abortion clinic. In 2009, after Scott Roeder murdered George Tiller, an abortion provider, the Wichita Eagle reported that authorities discovered Sullenger’s name and phone number in a note in Roeder’s car. Sullenger said Roeder had only contacted her organization to receive details about Kansas’s ongoing prosecution of Tiller, whom the state had accused of violating regulations on late-term abortions. (Tiller was acquitted on all charges; Roeder attended his trial.) Terry himself organized protests alongside James Kopp before Kopp murdered Barnett Slepian, an abortion provider, in 1998. There’s no evidence that Terry materially assisted Kopp, but Terry’s aggressive tactics arguably placed clinics and doctors firmly into the shooter’s crosshairs. After Slepian’s death, Operation Rescue — then led by Flip Benham, an associate of Terry’s — released a statement that, in the words of the New York Times, “neither condoned nor condemned the killing.”
Terry’s star has faded with time. He no longer works with Operation Rescue, and at one point survived mostly off donations from the few supporters he could still claim. But his Buttigieg protest coincides with a recent campaign for renewed relevance. He recently appeared in Buffalo to announce a statewide “tour” to condemn Governor Andrew Cuomo for signing the Reproductive Health Act into law. Terry may hope to use Buttigieg’s campaign as a springboard to get back into the good graces of conservative Christians.
Randall Terry’s presence at Buttigieg’s events is a reminder that the Supreme Court’s verdict in Obergefell v. Hodges did not end the threat of violence toward LGBT people. But Terry doesn’t own Christianity, and Buttigieg, like any LGBT person, is certainly accustomed to defending both his faith and his person from antagonists like Terry. The candidate, for his part, told CNN that he would “prefer to have those kinds of debates in a respectful format, versus through interruption, but a president is going to have to deal with tougher things than being interrupted in a speech.”
This post has been updated to reflect that George Tiller was acquitted of violating state regulations on late-term abortions; the charges were not dropped.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 17, 2019
Remembering the Starr Report As We Await the Mueller Report

The upcoming release of the full (if redacted) Mueller report is bringing back memories of another famous presidential investigation connected to bad behavior and impeachment speculation: the Ken Starr Report of 1998, involving William Jefferson Clinton.
You think people have obsessed about Robert Mueller and what his findings might suggest about Donald Trump? It’s nothing compared to the furor unleashed just over 20 years ago when the book-length Starr Report went public (after a hasty vote in Congress to release it). T.A. Frank recently remembered the moment:
Frank wasn’t exaggerating. An estimated 20 million people read the Starr Report online (or from printed downloads) within two days. Government servers crashed, and media sites scrambled to offer alternative feeding tubes for the insatiable demand. This was when less than half the U.S. population was online, and there was no social media to goose things along.
So far as we know, the Mueller report won’t have one key feature that made the Starr Report sensational reading: accounts of presidential sex. Starr’s account went into intimate and prurient detail about Clinton’s encounters with Monica Lewinsky, to a degree that exceeded anything necessary to support the essential claim that he had lied about his sex life in a sworn deposition in an unrelated case, and later in grand jury testimony, as one sober observer later explained:
Much later it became a matter of considerable interest that at least one Starr staffer who argued for the humiliating level of sexual detail was a young attorney named Brett Kavanaugh. Whatever the Starr team’s motives, it produced a tome that Time magazine described as “a fetid blend of libido and legalese that reads like Jackie Collins by way of the Congressional Quarterly.” And however eagerly the public snapped up the document and waded through the turgid language of the law looking for the nasty bits, there’s no question its scope and voyeurism significantly discredited the report and the Republican House that used it to impeach its chief subject. Even Starr eventually regretted the whole thing.
At the time, though, the Starr Report was the culmination of a four-year investigation that began with the alleged Whitewater land deal in Arkansas and then drifted, uncontrolled, into all sorts of reports and rumors about the Clintons, eventually settling on his much-discussed if poorly documented sexual dalliances. Then Starr received tips involving evidence turned up during a lawsuit against Clinton by alleged Arkansas sexual-assault victim Paula Jones, and soon the story broke, first as secondhand buzz in the Drudge Report, and soon in the Washington Post and Newsweek, when America first heard the name Monica Lewinsky.
As it happens, I was working at the Democratic Leadership Council, a political group closely associated with Clinton, when that first front-page story appeared in the Post on January 21, 1998. It was so alarming that the senior staff of the DLC assembled after close of business at our CEO’s home to discuss the implications. After years of hearing talk about sexual allegations against Clinton, we all instinctively knew this was the one that might stick:
Thus began a cat-and-mouse game involving Starr’s pursuit of his quarry in the demilight of legal proceedings and political maneuvering — including, famously, Clinton’s public denial of “having sex with that woman,” with bits and pieces of the actual story dribbling out, some of it leaked by Starr’s own team. Republicans lined up in judgment of the president, while Democrats defended him (often after ritualistically condemning his behavior) as new revelations of sex and lying emerged.
Nearly nine months later, the long gestation period of Starr’s investigation and report finally ended, and it felt like the political system and the country it governed was slipping down a rabbit hole into unforeseen territory. Republicans behaved like they were in the grip of a weird compulsion, recognizing that much of the public thought they had no business prying into the president’s “private life” but moving toward a doomed effort to remove Clinton from office based on legal arguments few understood and even fewer thought sufficient. This became especially clear less than two months after the Starr Report was filed, when Republicans became the first non–White House party to lose House seats in a midterm election since 1934, forcing Clinton’s nemesis Newt Gingrich (who appeared to explain the disaster on Election Night before a background emblazoned with the unfortunate slogan “America’s Victory”) to resign as House Speaker the very next day. Yet House Republicans, whose leadership seemed to get hit with reports of their own sexual infidelities almost every day, went ahead and impeached Clinton, who was promptly acquitted by the Senate.
The differences between the Starr Report and the Mueller report are many, beginning with the very different legal authorizations that produced them. Starr was an “independent counsel” under a much-criticized and subsequently lapsed law that made him entirely separate from the Executive branch and the criminal-justice system (while being ultimately responsible to a three-judge panel), with a particular obligation to report evidence of impeachable offenses to Congress — the actual mandate for the Starr Report. Mueller is a “special counsel” appointed by and accountable to the attorney general. His report, accordingly, was made to William Barr, who unlike the eager congressional Republicans who encouraged maximum exposure of Starr’s sensational conclusions, succeeded in pre-spinning Mueller’s report with a highly exculpatory “summary of principal findings.” Barr has since wrestled with congressional Democrats over redactions that could hide a lot of damaging-to-Trump material.
There are some similarities between the Mueller and Starr processes, too. Neither, under long-established Justice Department policies, could indict a sitting president. Both prosecutors are career Republicans.
And to the extent their inquiries were adversarial, neither could “bag” its target. Bill Clinton served out his term and left office with a 66 percent job-approval rating and a robust political, diplomatic, and charitable career still ahead of him. While we won’t know until tomorrow at the earliest what the final Mueller report will have to say about Donald Trump (and some Mueller staff are hinting that it’s more damaging than William Barr has indicated), it’s not likely to revive flagging Democratic interest in impeaching the 45th president. Trump’s own consistently poor job-approval ratings (which have never been within shouting distance of Clinton’s post-impeachment numbers) represent the main threat to his presidency — along with congressional investigations that may push them even lower.
When the Mueller report does go public, in whatever redacted manner Barr insists upon, it’s unlikely that servers will crash or that any adolescents will embarrass their parents with pointed questions about cigars or oral sex (Trump has already exasperated parents via his comments in the famous Access Hollywood video that went public in 2016). Mueller himself is 74 and probably close to retirement; at the time of his report, Ken Starr was 52, with a long future in the public eye — including, most recently, a forced resignation as president of Baylor University following a scandal involving the cover-up of rapes and other sexual assaults by football players.
Clearly, Starr has never handled male sexual misconduct very well. Yet he’ll be most remembered for authoring one of the best-selling dirty books of all time. Robert Mueller will probably be happy to fade into obscurity with less drama, and so long as voters deny Donald Trump a second term, he’ll be forgiven by Democrats for disappointing them so sorely.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 17, 2019
Five Reasons Why Republicans Won’t Abandon Trump Like They Ditched Nixon

As we await the release of the Mueller report, an open question is whether evidence of serious presidential misconduct (even if it doesn’t, as Attorney General Barr’s “summary of principal findings” has asserted, rise to the level of any indictable offense) — will have any major impact on Donald Trump’s so-far impressive Republican support in fighting what he calls a “witch hunt.” The obvious precedent for believing that such a finding would erode his position even among Republicans is what happened to Richard M. Nixon in August of 1974, when the so-called “smoking gun” tapes were released (by order of the U.S. Supreme Court) showing him and his staff very clearly talking about suppressing any Watergate probe, well before the 1972 presidential election. As Politico noted on the 44th anniversary of this event, Nixon’s position deteriorated rapidly:
Is this sort of “ka-boom!” possible with respect to Trump? Probably not, unless the full Mueller report contains something unexpectedly shocking. If if does, there’d be some Republican heartburn, wouldn’t you think?
Yes, there could be some leakage of Republican support, or more likely louder squawking from the handful of Republicans who have resisted surrendering to the president’s blandishments and threats. But there are five reasons a broader Republican backlash like the one that helped push Nixon out of office won’t happen, even if it turns out Mueller’s report suggests obstruction of justice may have occurred after all (a possibility raised by Mueller’s conclusion that the evidence neither proved criminal obstruction beyond a reasonable doubt, nor exonerated Trump).
1. Trump and his defenders are arguing there’s no underlying crime. Nobody could say that with respect to Watergate. The endlessly repeated Nixon defense was that he knew nothing about the “third-rate burglary” of Watergate until long, long after the event. The smoking-gun tapes showed Nixon and his chief of staff talking about how to hush it all up a month after it occurred. Even a “third-rate” burglary is a felony. As Matthew Walther notes, that makes a difference:
This is the heart of the “witch hunt” argument, and it takes Republicans into the same territory successfully defended by Democrats when Bill Clinton was impeached in 1998 (when obstruction of justice was one of the articles of impeachment): Clinton was refusing to cooperate with an investigation of matters that shouldn’t have been investigated in the first place. That is exactly what we are hearing from most Republicans now with respect to the Mueller investigation, and before that, the FBI’s investigation of alleged collusion with Russia. It’s an illegitimate investigation, so who cares if the president tried to stop or curtail it?
There is a parallel argument made by some Republicans that presidents cannot commit “obstruction of justice” if the alleged misconduct is nonetheless within the scope of executive powers that are constitutionally sanctioned. No one in Nixon’s days had yet thought of that extension of the imperial presidency he otherwise exemplified.
2. Nixon was a lame-duck president; Trump’s definitely not. When the buzzards began circling Richard Nixon’s presidency, he was well into his second term, and faced a Democratic-controlled Congress that was not about to let him off the hook for any Watergate-related revelations. By the time definitive evidence of obstruction of justice emerged, the House was already considering articles of impeachment, and Democrats held 56 Senate seats. Trump is already running for reelection in what bids fair to become a savagely polarized 2020 campaign, and his party controls the Senate and thus can make (and almost certainly already has made) his removal from office via the impeachment process all but impossible. To the extent that Trump’s entire presidency is the product of some of the most intense partisanship in living memory, and his entire personality is based on his identity as a “winner,” the odds of him ever resigning in the face of attacks from Democrats seem very low. And Republicans know that.
3. Trump is a lot more popular among today’s Republicans than Nixon was among yesterday’s. People remember that Richard Nixon was reelected in 1972 by a huge landslide, but was forced to resign less than two years later. But it’s less clearly remembered that in between the two events his popularity steadily dropped — among Republicans as well as Democrats and independents.
According to Gallup, Nixon’s job-approval ratings among Republicans fell from 91 percent in February of 1973 to 54 percent by October of that year. There were multiple reasons for that plunge, including, yes, Watergate publicity (punctuated by the Saturday Night Massacre in which Nixon fired his attorney general, his deputy attorney general, and the Watergate special prosecutor), plus the resignation of his vice-president, Spiro Agnew, after being caught accepting bribes; growing public hostility to delays in ending the Vietnam War; and the beginning of a recession that interrupted a long period of economic growth. By the time Nixon was forced to resign, his approval rating overall was a terrible 24 percent, and just 50 percent among Republicans.
At present, Trump’s approval rating among Republicans (also according to Gallup) is at 89 percent. It’s never been lower than 79 percent during his presidency. As long as he’s this popular among his party’s rank and file, he’s got a decent shot at reelection, and more to the point, few in the ranks of GOP elected officials are going to cross him.
4. The Republican Party is more monochromatic ideologically than it was during Watergate.  Many conservative Republicans defended Nixon long after the public had soured on him.  That gave him some Republican support, but in those days of a strong moderate and even liberal wing of the GOP, it wasn’t enough to save him, as I noted in an earlier piece on the relative durability of Trump’s support:
It’s generally forgotten that in 1974 the U.S. Senate included a wide variety of moderate-to-liberal Republicans such as Lowell Weicker, Charles Percy, James Pearson, Charles Mathias, and many others. Now that species of Republican is long gone, and even those considered “moderates” are more accurately moderate conservatives. That means any Republican president of the United States is going to have more monolithic support from GOP elected officials, particularly when said president is especially popular among rank-and-file conservatives.
Anyone who watched the performance of Republicans on the House Oversight Committee during the testimony of former Trump attorney Michael Cohen (with the sole exception of libertarian heretic Justin Amash) recognized a savagely pro-Trump posture that did not comport with any interest in the underlying facts. These lawmakers are reminiscent of no one in the Watergate saga more than Representative Earl Landgrebe of Indiana, who famously said soon before Nixon resigned: “Don’t confuse me with facts; my mind is made up … [I’ll] stick with my president even if he and I have to be taken out of this building and shot.”
5. Trump’s whole approach to politics incentivizes partisan combat, not fact-based investigations. Whether or not Donald Trump is a symptom of partisan and ideological polarization on the right, or its cause (he’s almost certainly both), we have long passed the point at which Republicans are particularly concerned about whether his words are truthful or his behavior is lawful. If we’ve all become somewhat desensitized to presidential lying, it’s particularly true of fellow partisans whose daily bread is Fox & Friends, and who glory in how crazy his lies drive journalists and Democrats. Those who can remain calm when their president makes up a myth of “millions of illegal votes” for his opponent in 2016 because he can’t accept the fact that he lost the popular vote, and routinely threatens his enemies with extra-constitutional vengeance, are not suddenly going to dump him just because Robert Mueller concludes he probably had malign motives for firing James Comey. It would seem crazy to the “party base” to treat as intolerable the sort of unsavory but noncriminal allegations we are likely to hear, when Republicans have already tolerated — indeed, celebrated — so much else. Indeed, even before the Mueller report’s release, key congressional Republicans are announcing it’s harmless, sight unseen.
Now, of course, it’s always possible that Mueller or House Democrats will now or later produce evidence of something even worse than we imagined that just happens not to involve collusion with Russia or obstruction of justice. Then, perhaps, we’d find out that Trump exaggerated in his chilling boast that he could “stand in the middle of Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody” and not lose voters. But anyone who counts on Republicans to take him down, or roll over as many of them did with Nixon, hasn’t really been paying attention.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 17, 2019
Buttigieg and Delaney Want to Bring Back One of Bill Clinton’s Signature Proposals

With a 2020 presidential field as large as the Democrats’, coming up with “signature” policy ideas can be tough, particularly with two candidates deciding to run basically single-issue crusades (Jay Inslee on climate change and Eric Swalwell on gun safety), and another having patented some attractive initiatives in 2016 (Bernie Sanders with Medicare for All and free college tuition). Still, Cory Booker’s got his “baby bonds,” and Kamala Harris her teacher pay plan, and Elizabeth Warren has an entire suite of policies based on her vow to fight corporate consolidation.
South Bend mayor Pete Buttigieg has been fairly clear about his determination to build a campaign around his personality and his “narrative” understanding of the challenges facing the country before descending into much policy detail, and it’s worked well for him so far. But he has laid claim to one venerable Democratic policy idea that reinforces the communitarian themes he has been articulating: national service. Politico has the story:
Actually, a much less visible candidate, John Delaney, recently rolled out a detailed plan to create a comprehensive national service program, including a “Climate Corps” to work on green energy projects around the country. At this point Buttigieg is not being that specific, though like most national service proponents in the post-draft era, he’s eschewing the idea of mandatory service.
Both Delaney and Buttigieg are drawing on a tradition that goes back at least to FDR’s Civilian Conservation Corps, and was given fresh life in the 1960s when JFK created the Peace Corps and then LBJ launched a domestic counterpart, VISTA.
Various ideas aimed at expanding opportunities for civilian national service (sometimes with a military option) circulated in the 1980s, before George H.W. Bush, who had a noblesse oblige habit of disparaging compensated service as too mercenary, began his decentralized Points of Light initiative focused on occasional voluntary efforts rather than the FDR/Kennedy/LBJ approach of multiple years of full-time paid service coordinated as a national program. Poppy did, however, sign legislation creating a variety of national and community service demonstration programs, including some full-time models. And that, in turn, flowered under Bill Clinton.
Clinton made national service (an idea constantly promoted by the Democratic Leadership Council which he chaired before running for president) a signature initiative of his 1992 presidential campaign; it nicely reinforced the “community” portion of his “opportunity, responsibility, community” meta-message. He also adopted the DLC’s emphasis on the value of a large, GI Bill–type post-service educational benefit to deal with rising college costs. Taking office during a debt-and-deficit panic, and facing the traditional conservative resistance to compensated service, Clinton was nonetheless able during his first year to get a relatively small program called AmeriCorps off the ground.
While AmeriCorps (which absorbed VISTA and encompassed part-time as well as full-time service) never achieved anything like the scale its designers imagined, it survived frequent congressional Republican attempts in the 1990s to kill it as a Clinton vanity project. After 9/11, George W. Bush temporarily embraced national service, devoting a significant portion of his 2002 State of the Union address to the topic, but largely shirking it for the rest of his presidency (he did help revive bipartisan support for AmeriCorps, though, and Congress boosted its funding north of $900 million by the end of his first term). Then Barack Obama made an ambitious effort to expand AmeriCorps to 200,000 full-time participants, but again, Republican opposition and funding limitations kept it to around 80,000. In her 2016 campaign, Hillary Clinton revived a family tradition by proposing a large, hybrid expansion of full-time compensated and part-time uncompensated service. She would have tripled the size of AmeriCorps and doubled the post-service educational benefit it offered. Like so many other initiatives, this one died with her campaign; the Trump administration has sought to eliminate funding for AmeriCorps altogether.
Presumably any Democrat who is elected president will at least let AmeriCorps limp along as a worthy if limited effort. But the possibility of taking it to the kind of scale that the Clintons envisioned will probably depend on the enthusiasm of candidates like Buttigieg (and possibly Delaney, though you’d have to give him a much smaller chance of becoming viable than Mayor Pete). It’s a classic triple-play politically: offering an ethic of service to country that Democrats sometimes struggle to authentically promote; a hands-on, community-focused way to deal with entrenched social problems; and a limited but robust contribution to the ability of young people to afford college. In 1992, Clinton used to say that talking about national service was his most reliable applause line, to the surprise of many of his advisers. It could be a winner again, or at least a signature.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 17, 2019
Which Democratic Presidential Candidates Have Qualified for the First Debates?

On June 26 and 27 in Miami (on NBC, MSNBC, and Telemundo) and on July 30 and 31 in Detroit (on CNN), the 2020 Democratic presidential contest will quickly get real with the first sanctioned candidate debates of the cycle. In February, the Democratic National Committee published reasonably clear rules and guidelines for these events, making it possible to figure out with some specificity which candidates have qualified for the big stage — or rather, stages, since the DNC anticipates events that span two consecutive evenings to accommodate the large field, with placement in one night or the other being determined randomly (so no “kiddie table” debates like Republicans held in 2016 for less-esteemed candidates).
The DNC offered two ways to qualify:
So who’s already qualified? According to an analysis from FiveThirtyEight, 14 announced candidates, and one very prominent unannounced candidate, have made the cut, all but one via the polling method. We’ll continue updating this post as more candidates make the cut.
Though he’s yet to actually announce, Biden has ranked at or very near the top in every national and early-state poll taken this year. The explosion of the Biden–Abrams Dream Ticket idea being circulated by Biden boosters has been one piece of bad news recently for the former Veep, and fresh allegations of inappropriate touching of women has been another. But he hasn’t lost much if anything in the polls, and his entry very soon seems very likely if not absolutely certain.
Sanders has ranked second in the bulk of national and early-state surveys, and is running first in some New Hampshire polls. Given his large and active small-donor fundraising base, Sanders would certainly qualify by the grassroots fundraising method if he needed it. He is in some respects the most predictable quantity in the 2020 contest, given his high name ID and broad national base of support. That base, however, continues to skew youngish and whitish.
Harris is one of a group of candidates who are trailing Biden and Sanders by a significant margin in most polls, but who rank consistently well above the DNC’s one percent threshold for inclusion in the debates. Her main asset is strategic: If she can outflank Cory Booker among African-American voters and do very well in South Carolina, then she could clean up in the newly early (March 3) primary in her home state of California. Good debate performances could help her stay near the top.
Like Sanders, O’Rourke had boffo initial fundraising with a diverse (though not as diverse as Bernie’s) small donor base, but has waxed and waned and waxed again in the polls. He’s running roughly even with Harris nationally, though a bit further back in the early states, where he will need to make up ground through personal appearances.
Given her political stature, the Massachusetts senator has not impressed most observers with either her fundraising or her poll numbers, though in the latter respect, she’s comfortably above the debate threshold. Debates could help her showcase her universally acknowledged policy chops, but will also test concerns about her “likability.” Like Harris, she remains well-positioned ideologically in a diverse but left-leaning field.
If O’Rourke looks better in national than in early-state polls, Booker is the reverse. But he trails Kamala Harris almost everywhere, which is a big problem for a candidate who needs to show strength among African-Americans from the get-go. His Wall Street and Silicon Valley connections should keep him funded well for at least a good while.
The Minnesota senator is part of another group of candidates who have qualified for the debates by meeting the polling threshold, but otherwise trail the pack by significant margins. She is doing relatively well in next-door Iowa, and perhaps more than anyone else, would benefit from a decision by Joe Biden to give 2020 a pass.
If there’s someone in the group of candidates far behind the pace who seems to have a bullet next to his name at present, it’s South Bend mayor Pete Buttigieg. He met the minimal polling threshold some time ago, and has recently made impressive gains, including a Quinnipiac showing in which he rocketed past Booker and Klobuchar into a tie for fifth place with Warren. The debates will test whether he can convert the good personal impression he’s been making with selected audiences into a viable candidacy, despite his youth (he’s 37) and the limitations of his résumé in public office.
The former San Antonio mayor and HUD secretary hasn’t made much of a national impression (he’s at the debate minimum of one percent in national and Iowa polls) so far. But he has potential as the only Latino in the field, and could make a splash in Nevada, and an even bigger splash in the March 3 megastates of California and Texas. He mostly needs to survive in the early going. It might help him, too, if he obtained greater proficiency in speaking Spanish.
It’s very good for the Democratic Party and for the country that four women serving in the U.S. Senate are running for president. It’s not very good for New York’s Kirsten Gillibrand, who’s struggled to distinguish herself from the other, more easily identified women, and from the rest of the field generally. She’s a candidate who could really benefit from a strong debate performance.
The Washington governor does not have Gillibrand’s problem at all; he’s identified himself clearly as the candidate who is making climate change his sole priority. The furor over the Green New Deal helped make “his” issue even more paramount in the national debate, but also gave other candidates a way to show themselves as credibly urgent about climate change. If voters or the media get notably tired of listening to senators, Inslee’s non-Washington résumé could help him.
The latest to qualify by virtue of the polling threshold, the former Colorado governor (and Denver mayor) is clearly running as a self-identified “moderate,” presumably competing with Biden and Klobuchar (and perhaps O’Rourke) for voters  alarmed at the party’s leftward tilt. Like Klobuchar, his relatively close proximity to Iowa gives him a bit of an advantage if he can get traction there. But both his ideological and geographical base could receive an existential threat if Colorado senator Michael Bennet jumps into the race, which he’s recently said he very well might.
At first the only candidate to qualify for the debates via the grassroots fundraising method, and now also qualifying in the polls, is entrepreneur and social-media sensation Andrew Yang, who has developed a significant and quite young following with his self-consciously quirky persona and a universal basic income proposal. If he can translate his online charisma to a debate stage, he could make some waves.
A former three-term congressman from Maryland, and prior to that a health-care entrepreneur and lender, Delaney was the first Democrat to declare for the 2020 race (way back in July of 2017), and has spent a great deal of time in Iowa and New Hampshire. He is an unabashed moderate who opposes the Green New Deal and still supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement that most Democrats now oppose. He’s qualified for the debates via minimum poll showings, but is in danger of following the path trod by fellow Marylander Martin O’Malley in 2016: doing everything right other than becoming popular.
The Hawaii congresswoman has qualified by meeting the grassroots fundraising threshold. As a lifelong surfer, a military veteran, a Hindu, and an outspoken progressive, Gabbard might be attracting more attention in a less crowded field. But much of the buzz about her has been negative, based on her controversial habit of defending Syria’s murderous president Bashar al-Assad, her links to anti-Islamic Hindu nationalists in India, and her history of anti-LGBTQ rhetoric (for which she has apologized). She does share with Bernie Sanders and (so far not debate-qualified) Mike Gravel a strongly noninterventionist foreign policy posture, but may just be too tainted for viability.
So that’s the current debate field. Who else might qualify?
There are several potential candidates who might make the polling threshold pretty quickly if they choose to run, including Montana governor Steve Bullock (who has said he’d decide once his legislature has adjourned); former Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe, who is a legendary fundraiser; and the aforementioned Michael Bennet. Another announced candidate, New Agey self-help author Marianne Williamson, has enough of a national following that she might qualify via the grassroots fundraising method, if not polling minimums.
At this point it doesn’t seem likely that the debate-qualified field will rise above 20 candidates, forcing sponsors, under the DNC rules, to cut previous qualifiers to get down to that maximum number. So those who have made the cut can start practicing pretty soon, with the complication that they have no idea which rivals they will actually be facing. It could get unpredictably wild and predictably important in the winnowing of this huge field.
This post has been updated throughout.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 17, 2019
Trump Is Not Attacking Ilhan Omar But All Muslims and Minorities

Congressional Democrats, reports the New York Times, find Ilhan Omar a “complicated figure to defend.” Their exhaustion is understandable; tamping down outrage at various Omar statements seems to account for the better part of their job these days. But what is at issue has nothing to do with Ilhan Omar at all but a massive national hate campaign against Muslim-Americans.
The proximate cause of the latest flare-up is a speech Omar delivered to CAIR, a Muslim-American civil-rights group. “CAIR was founded after 9/11,” Omar said, “because they recognized that some people did something and that all of us were starting to lose access to our civil liberties.” The first part of the sentence is false — CAIR was founded in 1994 — but it is the second part of the sentence that has produced outrage. President Trump has circulated a video repeating the sentence fragment, interspersed with images of the 9/11 attack.
Here is another instance of conservatives playing the role of aggrieved snowflakes. They don’t deny the truth of her statement. Her sin is a lack of sensitivity. Omar “minimized the gravity of the deadliest foreign attack on U.S. soil ever,” complains David French.
Omar’s point, of course, was not that 9/11 was a trivial incident, but that the broader Muslim community was targeted as a result. The outrage at her comment has borne out that point. The “rule” she violated is a failure to properly genuflect upon the awfulness of the 9/11 attacks in the course of referencing them, but this is hardly a universal convention. It’s easy to see how ginned up the outrage is if you replace the particulars of the case. Suppose a Jewish person was complaining about Jews as a whole being blamed for some particular human-rights violation carried out by Israelis. Would it really be necessary for them to pause the sentence and linger on the tragedy of the event? Would it be fair to associate them with the event itself if they failed to do so?
Of course it wouldn’t. Indeed, if a Jew was attacked in such a manner, we would rightly see the attack as anti-Semitic.
Anti-Semitism, of course, forms the backdrop for the present controversy, because Omar has made ugly comments questioning the loyalty of American supporters of their country’s alliance with Israel. If, like me, you objected to Omar’s use of a dual-loyalty smear against Jews, you should also object to dual-loyalty smears against Muslims.
Instead, the barrage of attacks on Omar has confirmed the right’s complete indifference to this principle. Trump’s political message vis-à-vis the Jews has followed a paradoxical style on display by far-right parties in Europe. It combines a tight embrace of white Christian nationalists, including a sotto voce outreach to actual Nazis, with deep support for Israel and a war-of-civilizations attack on Muslims writ large. This brand of politics indulges in classic anti-Semitic tropes, such as Trump’s closing campaign ad darkly blaming various Jewish financiers for orchestrating various miseries experienced by the American heartland. But it also dabbles in intense philo-Semitism in cases where Jews are pitted against Muslims. It certainly is not a consistent rejection of bigotry in general or even anti-Semitism in particular.
The right-wing fixation on Omar gives away the game in several respects. It shows that the right’s alleged concern about bigotry is utterly partisan and excludes Muslims altogether. Trump has made a hundred times as many bigoted remarks as Omar, and has a thousand times more power. His attacks on her are a tool in a campaign of vilification and dehumanization which has ranged from fabricating stories of Muslim-Americans celebrating the 9/11 attacks to constant, indiscriminate smears of an entire faith (“Islam hates us”).
The Democratic Party’s response has been wholly inadequate to the historic stakes. Democrats have limited the scope of their response to the insensitivity of politicizing 9/11 (“The president shouldn’t use the painful images of 9/11 for a political attack,” suggests House Speaker Nancy Pelosi) or even conceding the legitimacy of the pseudo-outrage against Omar (Senator Kirsten Gillibrand: “As a senator who represents 9/11 victims, I can’t accept any minimizing of that pain”).
It is surely tiresome for Democrats to have to constantly come up with messages about a freshman member of Congress who is careless with facts, constantly wanders off message, and fond of conspiracy theories. In her short time in Congress, in addition to stoking anti-Semitism, she has baselessly insinuated that Senator Lindsey Graham is being sexually blackmailed by Trump and attacked the opposition to Venezuela’s brutal dictatorship as war criminals far right and illegitimate*. Omar is arguably the most counterproductive Democrat in the House of Representatives. Her party should be encouraging a primary challenger to run against her.
Democrats unwilling to frontally challenge the smears of Omar because they don’t like her are making the same mistake as Democrats who refused to condemn her dual-loyalty smears because they do like her. Omar herself is not the issue here. She is not the target of Trump’s hate campaign. The target is all Muslims, as well as the principle that minorities deserve to be treated as full Americans.
*The original post took at face value Omar’s comment describing the Venezuelan opposition as war criminals, following the interpretation in this Bulwark story. It seems more likely Omar was speaking hypothetically about war crimes, so I have removed that description.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 17, 2019
Ilhan Omar Is Facing Death Threats. Pundits Are Worried She’ll Hurt the Democrats’ Election Odds.

The Washington Post on Tuesday published a story about Chad Loder, a cybersecurity expert and CEO of the company Habitu8, which trains companies on how to deal with cyber threats. Like many Americans, Loder bore witness to the vitriol targeting Ilhan Omar, the freshman U.S. congresswoman from Minneapolis, that exploded last week after Republicans accused her of trivializing the 9/11 terrorist attacks. (While discussing the costs borne by Muslims generally due to the actions of a few extremists, Omar described the attacks as “some people did something.”) Loder decided to perform an experiment: Using Twitter’s search feature, he input the handles of Omar’s two accounts and added terms like “rope,” “bullet,” “noose,” and “hanged,” along with phrases like “I hope someone” and “someone needs to.” The exercise yielded what he said were “hundreds” of direct threats against the congresswoman, and many more indirect ones. “[Some] random person somewhere who’s just on the edge of a mental breakdown will see [the inciting tweets from GOP leaders] and they’ll take matters into their own hands,” Loder worried.
Tragedy has not yet struck, but these posts are part of a larger pattern: Prior to last week’s wave, the FBI arrested a man in New York who threatened to “put a bullet in [Omar’s] fucking skull.” The agency announced in early March that it was investigating graffiti scrawled in a Twin Cities bathroom stall that read “Assassinate Ilhan Omar” in Sharpie ink. The congresswoman’s name also appeared alongside several others — including Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi’s and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer’s — on a hit list compiled by Christopher Paul Hasson, a U.S. Coast Guard lieutenant and self-described white nationalist who, until his arrest in February, was stockpiling firearms and ammunition in preparation for a large-scale massacre of civilians.
The political response to the latest threats has been partisan. Republicans have mostly declined to condemn them, while the replies from Democrats have ranged from the unequivocally supportive — in the case of progressives like Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders — to the somewhat tepid, from more center-left figures like Kirsten Gillibrand and Amy Klobuchar. All seem to agree, though, that the GOP tweets were dangerous and put Omar at risk — especially President Trump’s, which intercut footage of her remarks with footage of the Twin Towers in flames. This conclusion seems especially true given how people like Cesar Sayoc and Robert Bowers have used the president’s verbal salvos and conspiracy theories as pretexts for their own terroristic behavior.
Yet in the midst of it all, the Atlantic’s David Frum saw fit to pose a question he deemed of special import at the time: How might Omar’s remarks and her fellow Democrats’ support impact the party’s performance in upcoming elections?
Frum’s answer — which he outlines in his latest piece, “Democrats Are Falling Into the Ilhan Omar Trap” — is that by defending Omar against the right-wing onslaught, the Democrats have backed themselves into a corner. “That one tweet succeeded to perfection,” wrote the former George W. Bush speechwriter, referring to Trump’s video. “Trump wishes to make Omar the face of the Democratic Party heading into the 2020 elections — and now he has provoked Democrats to comply.” Frum went on to describe the congresswoman’s so-called “recklessness” as a liability for a party that “[wants] to win national elections and govern the country.” He insisted that the GOP’s characterization of her remarks about Islamophobia was correct — that she was, in effect, exonerating the 9/11 hijackers. He deployed the now-standard canard that Omar speaks disparagingly about Jews, even though a more precise assessment is that she speaks disparagingly about the Israeli government and its American lobbyists, sometimes in terms that could be interpreted as anti-Semitic. And he listed as further evidence of iniquity Omar’s personal affiliations that he deems radical — namely, that her co-headliner at a fundraising event, Hassan Shibly, has condemned Israel as an “[enemy] of God and humanity” for its brutal treatment of Palestinians, and is the lawyer for Hoda Muthana, an American woman who married an ISIS fighter and pledged allegiance to the terrorist group. (In other words: a lawyer who does his job.)
Nevermind that a week during which the congresswoman is facing death threats and inflammatory rhetoric from the president is an odd time for Frum to catalogue why he thinks she is toxic. His analysis also illustrates one of the worst impulses of political journalism: Its tendency to measure amorality among politicians in terms of how it impacts the horse race, rather than whether it is socially dangerous or conveys something more troubling about American society. (He’s being praised for it, regardless.) This approach does not define all of Frum’s work. His 2017 essay, “How to Build an Autocracy,” delved lucidly into how Trump’s election could erode American democracy. Yet that perspective seems to have abandoned him here. Readers are left instead with an ill-conceived and poorly timed argument that gives a pollster’s answer to a moral question. (Frum’s lone concession to the horror of Omar’s predicament comes toward the end, when he writes in passing that she “has been a target of extremist criticism, some of it verging on incitement.”)
It is especially interesting that Frum spills so little ink assessing the significance of a major political party going out of its way to mischaracterize Omar’s remarks in order to make her a target for potential violence, considering the pratfalls that dot his own career. A not-insignificant share of Frum’s punditry has been devoted to making reckless comments, claims, and arguments for which he was compelled to apologize. He was a fervent supporter of the Iraq War, which commenced under false pretenses and resulted in the deaths of nearly half a million people. He later expressed regret for it. In 2011, he wrote a column at CNN about his newfound support for marriage equality, titled “I was wrong about same-sex marriage.” And in 2014, he wrote a grudging apology at the Atlantic for tweeting allegations that a photo of two brothers, crying and covered in blood, at a hospital in Gaza after an Israeli airstrike killed their father, was inauthentic. Though his instinct to apologize is laudable, the hawkish verve and disdain for civil rights that marked his errors were neither minor nor ambiguous. Yet he seems uninterested in extending to Omar the same generosity that has allowed him to remain employed and relevant despite his mistakes. (The congresswoman, it is worth noting, has also apologized for her use of anti-Semitic tropes.)
Even if one concedes that Frum’s thesis is an appropriate one to try proving right now, the graver mistake, rather than defend Omar, would be for Democrats to let Republican characterizations dictate their electoral strategy. The GOP is the party, after all, for which President Obama was a Kenya-born socialist, and for which the Democrats — the party of “open borders” and “crime” — are “executing” babies after they are born. Clearly, there are few limits to how far Republicans will go to mischaracterize Democratic positions, including by lying. This does not mean that Democratic leaders are not nervous anyway. Speaker Pelosi has sought repeatedly to compel Omar’s silence on fraught subjects like Israel and, more generally, been dismissive of the influence held by progressive freshmen like Omar, Rashida Tlaib, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The obvious impulse is to cast these women as marginal and their ideas as aspirational in a party that is more moderate than they are — a clear play, to Frum’s point, for voters who might be wavering on whom to support in 2020. This approach has rankled progressive Democrats, and confirms a longstanding critique of the party, which is that by letting Republicans set the terms of the debate, Democrats are cowed into sacrificing progressive principles and appearing weak.
But more broadly, they also risk alienating the very voters whom they need to show up in 2020 and in elections to come, and who comprise the party’s current and future base: young people and nonwhites, especially nonwhite women. “The Democratic Party can’t run away from the fight regarding Ilhan Omar, because she represents the country,” Justice Democrats communications director Waleed Shahid told the New York Times on Tuesday. “In the story between Make America Great Again or the new America we are becoming, she is a pivotal character.” Tlaib echoed his concerns: “They put us in photos when they want to show our party is diverse,” the Michigan congresswoman, who is Palestinian-American, wrote on Twitter. “However, when we ask to be at the table, or speak up about issues that impact who we are, what we fight for, and why we ran in the first place, we are ignored.”
It is a risk that Pelosi seems willing to take. And it may prove to be pragmatic toward a 2020 victory — or not — but it is certainly not principled. As for whether all Democrats will be penalized henceforth for everything controversial that Omar says, that depends on a public reading of their response to the Republican Party’s onslaught that prefers letting it go unanswered to condemning it unequivocally. It is possible that a plurality of Americans find this desirable. And it is abundantly clear where David Frum stands on the subject. But if the supportive response from people like Sanders, Warren, and others does end up costing the party votes down the road, then the real problem is much bigger than winning or losing elections.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 17, 2019
Why Julián Castro Could Be 2020’s Dark Horse Candidate

The vast 2020 Democratic presidential field has a lot of diversity. It includes three African-Americans (if you include Miramar, Florida, mayor Wayne Hassam, as you probably should), three Asian-Americans, six women, a Hindu, a Jew, and an openly gay married man.
But there’s only one representative of the country’s, and the Democratic Party’s, fastest-growing demographic group, Latinos. That would be former San Antonio mayor and HUD secretary Julián Castro.
Castro has an impressive résumé for a 44-year-old pol. But it’s easy to underestimate him as a presidential candidate. Some progressives don’t trust him because of his alleged coziness with Wall Street at HUD (which he tartly denied in an interview with my colleague Gabriel Debenedetti). He hasn’t raised a lot of money ($1.1 million in the first quarter of 2019, compared with $9.4 million for fellow Texan Beto O’Rourke). He’s nowhere in the polls so far (he’s currently ninth in the polling averages at RealClearPolitics, at 1.3 percent). And although he’s the second credible Latino candidate for president (after Bill Richardson in 2008), and is the grandchild of immigrants from Mexico, he’s not really fluent in Spanish.
Still, he has a position on the crucial immigration issue that should appeal to fellow Latinos, and actually represents a lot of second- or third-generation Latino-Americans who are shaky in Spanish. And if he can demonstrate some political viability very early in the nomination process, he has an enormous potential for a breakthrough soon thereafter, as Perry Bacon Jr. explains:
So he’s in a bit of a trap: He can’t mobilize Latino voters behind him unless he demonstrates viability, and he won’t look viable without strong Latino support. He has plenty of time to make a strong impression in debates and retail campaigning. And like those Democratic rivals who are boasting of their electability as ambassadors to Trump voters in the Heartland, Castro has his own electability argument, as Bacon notes:
It’s not entirely clear how Julián Castro makes himself the Barack Obama of Latino Democrats, but until he fails, it would be foolish to count him out.
This post has been corrected to show that Castro is the grandchild of immigrants, not the child of immigrants as incorrectly stated originally.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 17, 2019
Trump Vetoes Resolution to End U.S. Support for Saudi War (Crimes) in Yemen

As a presidential candidate, Donald Trump repeatedly suggested that Saudi Arabia had orchestrated the 9/11 attacks — and that the United States should stop wasting resources on bloody Middle Eastern wars that have no real connection to our national interest.
As president, Trump just vetoed a congressional resolution that would have ended U.S. support for a Saudi war in Yemen that has likely claimed the lives of more than 85,000 children under 5 years old, and triggered the worst humanitarian crisis on planet Earth — so as to defend America’s vital interest in ensuring that the Middle East’s poorest country is ruled by a puppet of Sunni Islamists, instead of Shia ones.
Earlier this month, for the first time ever, Congress invoked the War Powers Resolution of 1973 to end American involvement in a conflict overseas. Bipartisan majorities in the House and Senate decided that the U.S. had no interest in helping the Saudis drop American-made bombs on Yemeni school buses and maintain a blockade that has Yemen trembling on the precipice of the worst famine humanity has seen in 100 years.
Trump was always expected to reject this analysis. But his rationale for doing so has never been clear. After all, Trump did bring some of his isolationist intuitions with him to the Oval Office. He’s spent much of his first term calling for a reduction in U.S. involvement in Afghanistan and Syria. So what has persuaded the commander-in-chief that the terrible price of U.S. complicity in Yemen’s brutal civil war is worth paying? What grand strategic considerations have persuaded the leader of the free world that the total destruction of the Houthi rebels is a core security interest of the United States? According to the Washington Post:
This report appears broadly consistent with the president’s official statement on the veto. “This resolution is an unnecessary, dangerous attempt to weaken my constitutional authorities, endangering the lives of American citizens and brave service members, both today and in the future,” the president said, making the odd argument that pulling back from a war in the Middle East will make it more likely that U.S. soldiers will perish while fighting other wars in the Middle East (plus, won’t somebody please think of “my constitutional authorities”).
Trump probably isn’t the first American president to needlessly prolong (or launch) a war out of a combination of pique, and narcissistic indifference to the suffering of foreign peoples. But, at the very least, his predecessors put a bit more effort into disguising their nihilism.
Eric Levitz







Apr. 17, 2019
The McKinsey Way to Save an Island
Why is a bankrupt Puerto Rico spending more than a billion dollars on expert advice?
“I mean, it’s basically a management crisis,” Bertil Chappuis said one afternoon, as we sat at a Cuban luncheonette in San Juan. “Set aside the politics. Set aside policy. Set aside all of that. There was a true management crisis that had come to a head because of the debt.”
Nail, meet hammer: Chappuis is a senior partner at McKinsey & Company, perhaps the world’s most influential management consulting firm. McKinsey prides itself on tackling the world’s most important and intractable problem. Over its century-long existence, the firm — or “The Firm,” as its employees refer to it — has conceived and propagated many of the ideas that now rule American business, which is to say, American life. Its influence can be seen in corporate suites (a disproportionate number of Fortune 500 CEOs are ex-McKinsey consultants) and grocery stores (the bar code is a McKinsey innovation), in banks, universities, and hospitals. All the while, the firm has maintained an air of mystery, seldom disclosing the details of its works, deflecting credit when its efforts are successful, dodging blame when they blow up or inflict pain on those on the receiving end of its efficiencies.
For the last two years, though, Chappuis and the firm have taken on an unusually visible role in Puerto Rico’s contentious and very public bankruptcy process. Under a law Congress passed in 2016, the island’s finances are overseen by a federally appointed board, which hired McKinsey as its “strategic consultant.” Chappuis, in turn, is the firm’s point man. In October, the board issued a 148-page fiscal plan that touches nearly every sector of the Puerto Rican government. Following McKinsey’s guidance, it laid out numerous service reductions, agency consolidations, and “right-sizing” measures — the plan’s euphemism for job cuts.
“This is a historic opportunity to actually reset the game here,” Chappuis declared when we first met in mid-January. Raised in San Juan, he is tall and dark-haired with a regal bearing. His background is in internet technology, and he has scant experience dealing with a governance problem on the scale of Puerto Rico’s. He has never worked as an elected official or a bureaucrat or an economist (but he leads a team of consultants who do have such expertise). What he does possess is an infectious enthusiasm for management science — the much-chronicled “McKinsey Way.” His optimism is unwavering, even as his work and the firm’s role in Puerto Rico seemed imperiled.
The day after we had coffee, public employees would protest outside the federal courthouse, where the island’s bankruptcy case was being heard. Leaders of police unions were blaming a wave of murders on budget cuts and mismanagement. The critics of the oversight board — or la junta de control, as it is called by people in Puerto Rico who say its powers far exceed oversight — decry both the impact of the cuts and the fact that much of the resulting savings would go to repay creditors, including the hedge funds, many of which bought bonds at a deep discount after Puerto Rico defaulted on its debts.
In D.C., Democrats like presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren were excoriating McKinsey for having “paved the way for many of Puerto Rico’s creditors to receive handsome payouts.” Meanwhile, the Trump administration was maneuvering to cut federal disaster aid to the financially fragile island, a campaign that culminated in April with a Twitter tantrum accusing Puerto Rico’s “grossly incompetent” elected leaders of “foolishly or corruptly” spending the money the territory had already received. Democrats and Republicans in Congress are currently at loggerheads about how much, or how little, relief to offer.
As if that weren’t enough, McKinsey’s involvement in Puerto Rico was complicated by … McKinsey. Over the past year, the firm’s once unimpeachable reputation has been tainted by disclosures stemming from a series of lawsuits and newspaper investigations that reveal its intimate links to bad businesses (the pharmaceutical company that popularized opioids), bad policies (Trump’s immigration crackdown), and bad people (Saudi Arabia’s allegedly murderous Prince Mohammed bin Salman). McKinsey’s core company value, its loyalty to its clients, has been called into question by allegations of double-dealing. Last fall, the New York Times reported that McKinsey had millions invested in Puerto Rican bonds via the firm’s secretive internal hedge fund. McKinsey denied any conflict of interest, saying it was a routine investment that its consultants on the island were unaware of, but at the least the revelations gave McKinsey’s critics more ammunition to claim it was profiting from Puerto Rico’s misery.
Among the many mind-blowing figures in the fiscal plan, one stands out: the $1.5 billion earmarked over the next six years for costs related to the restructuring process itself — more than a billion of which will go to lawyers, bankers, and consultants, McKinsey included. (The firm billed the board more than $72 million through January, and its ongoing contracts total about $3.3 million a month.) The projected overall fees are more than five times what Detroit spent on its $20 billion bankruptcy, previously the largest local-government default in U.S. history, and higher even than the bill for Lehman Brothers, the $613 billion corporate liquidation that nearly destroyed the world economy.
All those fees are being footed by the taxpayers of Puerto Rico, which is far poorer than any U.S. state, with a median household income of less than $20,000 a year. Its economy was shrinking even before the island was devastated by Hurricane Maria, among the deadliest storms to ever hit U.S. territory. Everywhere in Puerto Rico, whether talking to community organizers or high-level government officials, I heard the refrain: “They’re treating us like guinea pigs.” And they’re right. Puerto Rico is a sort of island laboratory for an experiment in austerity. Although Detroit and a few other cities have gone bust — D.C. in the 1990s, New York in the 1970s — there is currently no legal mechanism for a U.S. state to declare bankruptcy. Yet as baby-boomers retire, many states face debt and pension obligations that may force a reckoning like Puerto Rico’s. Illinois owes $50,000 per taxpayer; New Jersey, $60,000.
Already the island is an object lesson in what happens when the logic of capitalism overtakes the structure of government. It is an article of faith at McKinsey that the same management theory that makes businesses run more profitably can be applied to further the public interest. “It’s not about cutting costs. It’s about how we deliver the service more productively,” Chappuis said, arguing that the focus on the immediate pain of austerity is simplistic. “The notion of value, of expanding the pie, of doing things better and cheaper — everything that moves a modern economy forward — is missing from the debate.”
Of course, that assumes that what advances the modern economy advances the common good — a proposition currently under siege from both the right and the left. “When things are working correctly, it’s a huge problem,” one young former McKinsey consultant said of the firm. Disgusted with the company’s work with federal law enforcement under Trump, he recently quit and penned a scathing anonymous essay in the leftist journal Current Affairs. “McKinsey is capitalism distilled,” he wrote. “Its advocacy of the primacy of the market has made governments more like businesses and businesses more like vampires.”
By the 1970s, though, the development engine had sputtered out. Like many bright young Puerto Ricans, Chappuis left to attend college, in his case at MIT, and made his life on the mainland. He moved to Palo Alto and joined McKinsey in the mid-1990s, just as the internet economy was lifting off. “I basically started our software practice,” Chappuis said. But he couldn’t stop thinking about Puerto Rico. “It was very frustrating to see everything around me booming and then I’d come back here and everything seemed to be in stasis.” Then stasis turned to crisis.
According to a forensic investigation commissioned by the oversight board, Puerto Rico’s government engaged in a wide variety of destructive borrowing behaviors. Many states have done similarly, but Puerto Rico has a much smaller tax base, and as a territory — without congressional representation or the right to vote for president — it can’t count on the same level of federal support. Puerto Rico’s Medicaid program, for instance, is funded at a much lower rate than the states’. For 30 years, the island used a federal tax break to attract new industries, such as pharmaceuticals, but Congress phased out the subsidy in 2006, sending the economy into a slump. Still, local politicians continued to spend lavishly on crowd-pleasing public works, like a $2 billion San Juan train line than ran just ten miles. They relied on accounting gimmicks to balance the budget, and when they faced a gap, they borrowed more money. Most citizens were barely aware of what was happening. The debt mounted stealthily like a hidden rot.
Because of Puerto Rico’s quirky territorial status, its bonds offered tax advantages to mainland investors. “Puerto Rico debt was a hot commodity on the bond market,” Chappuis said. “This became an art form in Puerto Rican government: how to carve out revenue streams.” Around five years ago, though, the streams finally ran dry. The island’s credit rating plunged as analysts questioned whether it would have the revenue to service its enormous debt. When Puerto Rico made a desperate issue of $3.5 billion in junk bonds in 2014, warnings in the prospectus suggested a default was imminent. But hedge funds snapped up the bonds anyway, enticed by a loophole in U.S. law that seemed to prevent Puerto Rico from declaring bankruptcy. It looked as if the bondholders could seize tax revenues or assets belonging to the island and no one could stop them.
President Obama and Congress stepped in to give Puerto Rico a measure of legal protection from its creditors. Defying a lobbying campaign by the hedge funds, Congress enacted a law called PROMESA — Spanish for “promise” — that had two main components. First, it allowed the island to seek bankruptcy protection and thus work out its debts in federal court. Second, it created the oversight board to supervise the bankruptcy proceedings and impose fiscal discipline on its government.
To defuse the inherent colonial tension, President Obama and congressional Republicans offered a degree of deference. The seven board members — a bipartisan group of legal, financial, and policy experts, a majority of whom were Puerto Rican by birth — were to share some power with the local governor and legislature. The board itself decided not to hire a large staff, in part out of a desire, according to several sources, to avoid looking like it was setting up a parallel government. Rather, it would rely on consultants.
After PROMESA passed, Chappuis said he felt compelled to return home. He interviewed to be appointed to the oversight board but wasn’t nominated. So instead he suggested to his partners at McKinsey that the firm pursue Puerto Rico as a client. “I saw the work we’d started doing in the public sector,” he said. “I’m not going to mention specific names … but we did a lot of public-sector work around the world, even here in the Caribbean.” Following a competitive bidding process, McKinsey won the contract to serve as the strategic adviser to the board.
Chappuis assembled a team led by consultants with many years of experience in bankruptcy, public finance, education, health care, and many other technical subjects. They swarmed the capital, poring over the government’s finances; examining its agencies, schools, and prisons; and delving into the most granular aspects of governance. “People don’t come to work at McKinsey for the money,” Chappuis insisted, echoing a sentiment I often heard from the firm’s employees. Its entry-level salaries are generous, and its senior partners make millions, but that compensation pales in comparison to what Chappuis said he could make in, say, private equity or investment banking. “I have a team of people who are — I know the word passionate is used a lot — but we have people who are deeply, deeply committed to the work.”
To Puerto Ricans who came in contact with McKinsey consultants, however, it was a shock — like an emergency airlift from Harvard Business School. The firm recruits from the most prestigious universities and M.B.A. programs, with the majority of its young consultants staying only a few years before seeking their fortunes in the upper echelons of business and public life. Alumni include Sheryl Sandberg, Chelsea Clinton, and presidential hopeful Mayor Pete Buttigieg. In September, according to a filing in the bankruptcy case, the senior full-time consultant in Puerto Rico — acting as its “integrating thought leader” — was a 31-year-old graduate of Harvard and the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins. A recent graduate of Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government was doing “deep dives” into the education and tourism budgets as well as examining police-department pension projections. A 2016 graduate of Columbia University helmed the “right-sizing” initiative and assisted with financial calculations to, for example, identify a date when the government “would run out of funding were it to defer reductions” in personnel costs. The analyst handling hurricane-damage assessments was from Yale’s class of 2017.
Chappuis won’t offer much detail about the firm’s interactions with the government, but court filings, as well as oversight-board emails obtained via a lawsuit brought by Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, reveal the dimensions of its intervention. McKinsey set what it refers to as an “aspirational vision” for the island. It advised the board on the proposed repeal of labor laws deemed too protective of workers. It tracked tax collections and projected health-care-cost inflation. According to invoices, it worked on “privatization options” for the highway authority and also the insolvent, patronage-riddled state-owned power company.
McKinsey stopped visiting in the immediate aftermath of the hurricane, but its consultants were back within weeks to survey the devastation, working on “power restoration” and “operational stabilization” at the power company. (It was crippled for months.) According to court documents, McKinsey sent consultants to San Juan’s airport to interview departing passengers to get “a sense for ‘what is happening on the ground.’ ” In what the consultants termed a “data poor environment,” they were trying to estimate how many people might leave the island for good in order to make accurate demographic and economic projections.
The oversight board’s demand for McKinsey’s services has only expanded over time. “It just keeps adding and adding,” Chappuis said, “and we keep absorbing.” But he said that despite the escalating work, McKinsey charges the board a flat fee that is below what private-sector clients pay.
Although PROMESA gave the oversight board the final say over the fiscal plan and budget, it left it to Puerto Rico’s government to identify specific cuts through what Chappuis describes as “a highly iterative process” involving numerous drafts and revisions of the plan. Still, with consultants taking on more and more responsibility, McKinsey has virtually become a shadow agency of the government, and a powerful one at that — feeding a colonialist dynamic that PROMESA was supposedly designed to avoid. In January, a federal official familiar with McKinsey’s work in Puerto Rico told me: “They’re doing everything. If McKinsey leaves, the board essentially ceases to operate.”
Chappuis disputes this characterization of McKinsey’s influence. “We, as the adviser, never make policy choices,” he said. “We’re fact finders, we’re analysts, and we’re framers of choices.”
Puerto Rico elected the 37-year-old Ricardo Rosselló governor soon after the passage of PROMESA. Although he campaigned on a pledge to put finances in order, his administration has been in constant, bitter conflict with the board and McKinsey. The first draft of the fiscal plan called for contracting the size of the government workforce by almost a third. That percentage has been reduced, but the initial target set the tone: The oversight board demands and Puerto Rico resists.
Under the plan’s current version, two-thirds of Puerto Rico’s 114 government agencies would be consolidated or eliminated, yielding an annual savings of $1.6 billion. The board would slash personnel costs, double the tuition at the University of Puerto Rico, and strip $153 million from the annual public-safety budget, partly by eliminating supposedly redundant divisions like the Rescue Squad. Since PROMESA was passed, Puerto Rico has closed or will close more than 450 public schools.
“It’s rare that a public institution forces itself to reform if they don’t have the driving reason to do so,” said the executive director of the oversight board, Natalie Jaresko, a former U.S. State Department official who oversaw a similar restructuring in Ukraine. (McKinsey was involved there, too.) Without McKinsey, she said, “it would be impossible to build a staff that is expert on every single issue.”
“Part of having to make choices,” she added, “is that it forces you to think.”
I was there to see Christian Sobrino, who greeted me wearing a casual GDB windbreaker. A young attorney, he was appointed by Governor Rosselló to wind down the bank. As the administration’s nonvoting representative on the oversight board, he serves as the governor’s voice. He was incensed with the board and McKinsey. “They have been trying to push layoffs — period,” he said. “We think it’s to punish a government that has not kneeled down and said, ‘Yes sir, whatever you want.’ ”
Soon after he started the job, Sobrino said, he met with Jaresko and, via speakerphone, McKinsey consultants. They presented him with a report, “The Path Forward”; on the first page, beneath the heading “The New Normal,” were three questions:
The patronizing tone, Sobrino said, was typical of McKinsey, as was what followed: charts projecting an imminent budget shortfall and outlining a “right-sizing initiative.” He expressed withering scorn for the “McKinsey-bots,” his name for what he described as a constantly changing cadre of hotshots who fly into Puerto Rico for short stints and treat local officials with condescension. “I think the first phrase I heard from a McKinsey-bot was, ‘We are going to corporatize the Puerto Rican government,’ ” Sobrino said. (No one at McKinsey could recall saying this, said a spokesman, adding that the statement “misrepresents both the goals and substance of our work.”) Sobrino contended that the firm has been supplying the oversight board with faulty analysis and fueling a perception that the island’s elected leaders were incompetent, a notion Trump has amplified. Last fall, I reached Sobrino by cell phone in Washington, where he said he was on a mission to counter a Trump tweetstorm inspired by the fiscal plan. “Not only are they not effective,” Sobrino said of McKinsey, “they’re causing harm to people.”
Complaints about the fiscal plan fall into several broad — and sometimes conflicting — categories. Critics such as Sobrino concede that some cuts were necessary but object to their being imposed clumsily by unelected outsiders. Others think the plan is not transformative enough. Dentist Rafael Torregrosa lobbied in vain to persuade McKinsey to consider health options that were less reliant on private insurers. “We’re paying good money to them as consultants of la junta to push only one model,” he said, “which happens to be the worst model in health care.”
The overwhelming sentiment, though, is sheer exhaustion with austerity. After Hurricane Maria, there was an expectation that the debt would be quickly resolved, with bondholders accepting a giant reduction in what they are owed — a “haircut,” in bankruptcy terminology. Hopes for debt forgiveness were bolstered by bankruptcy expert Donald Trump. “We’re going to have to wipe that out,” the president told Fox News two weeks after the hurricane. “You can say good-bye to that.” But administration officials quickly walked back his statement, and creditors are still fighting to be paid.
“We’re just being squeezed, squeezed, squeezed,” said Luis Carlos Robles, who works for a nonprofit that serves an impoverished San Juan neighborhood. His community of 26,000 people surrounding the Caño Martín Peña — a polluted, debris-choked waterway — had absorbed a double blow. Maria left around a thousand people there homeless, while the budget cuts led to the closure of four of its eight schools and the possible cancellation of a planned government dredging-and-redevelopment program. Crime is “exploding,” Robles said, with gangs committing murders in broad daylight and victims sometimes left lying in the street for hours.
Perhaps the most hotly contested part of the government-restructuring process is the issue of public safety. According to the fiscal plan, Puerto Rico spends almost $10,000 more per violent crime than the median state. “The conversation to date has been about ‘We don’t have enough money,’ ” Chappuis said. “It’s not the right way to frame it.” He said the police force has plenty of funding and has avoided layoffs by reducing its personnel costs through an early-retirement program and other attrition measures. But that was foolish, Chappuis argued, incentivizing the best and most experienced cops to leave. The fiscal plan’s solution was to have cheaper administrative staff do the office work, which would keep the police officers in the field.
The government and the police union maintain that austerity has ruined morale. Union leaders claim officers are working without disability or life insurance and their pensions are in jeopardy. The fiscal plan proposes reductions in overtime and “procurement optimization,” which translates into cheaper and less reliable guns, from the unions’ point of view. The changes have led to an exodus of some 1,700 officers in the last three years.
The police force has been consolidated with other emergency services into a unified Department of Public Safety, and that has led to competition for scarce resources. Bodies have piled up at the morgue and rape kits have gone untested at the Institute of Forensic Sciences. When the Firefighters Corps was shorthanded, the public-safety director, Héctor Pesquera, said he had to divert money from the police. “These budgets that the board imposed, I was not consulted at all,” he said. He complained that the oversight board’s red tape slowed his efforts to procure basic supplies, like bullets.
McKinsey has managed to find a few allies in local government. “The McKinsey fiscal-plan people are all over my numbers,” said Julia Keleher, Rosselló’s education secretary, in January, but she was happy about it. The school system has reading scores on a par with Jordan’s and Moldova’s, and Keleher, a fast-talking 44-year-old native of Philadelphia, said many of the schools that the plan targeted for closure had small enrollments. Shuttering them and shedding some 2,000 teachers would free up resources to strengthen the schools that remain, she argued. McKinsey separately helped her with a foundation she set up to support her work with the schools. “I’m trying to create that sense of being connected to a larger community of experts,” Keleher said. “It’s very difficult on an island.”
The school closings were extraordinarily unpopular. At the beginning of April, Keleher resigned under fire amid reports of an FBI investigation into her department. In an email, Keleher said the controversy surrounding her “explains a lot about why PR is in the condition it’s in,” and claimed that corruption in the department was something she had been trying to clean up. “What I’m living through is insane and destructive,” she wrote. Pesquera resigned as well shortly after he criticized budget cuts at a public hearing convened by the board. Nowhere has the hostility toward the fiscal plan been more intense, though, than at the University of Puerto Rico. “I’m an economist,” said professor Juan Lara. “I know that when you have a crisis like this, you do have to renegotiate the debt and have an austerity program. My complaint is that it’s not being done right.”
Lara questions both the depth of the cuts and where much of the projected savings are going: into the pockets of investors holding Puerto Rican bonds. “After the hurricane, it was basically taken as a given by everyone, including me, that there was going to be a very large haircut,” Lara said. But the federal judge overseeing the bankruptcy recently approved a settlement involving some $17 billion worth of bonds tied to Puerto Rico’s sales-tax revenues. The group of creditors with the strongest legal claim — many of them hedge funds — were set to get around 93 percent of their money back, less a haircut than a slight trim. (Meanwhile, a weaker group of creditors, who are mainly Puerto Rican, were likely to lose about half of their investment.) Even after the renegotiation, Lara predicted that the cost of servicing the debt would be so high that Puerto Rico would soon default again.
One afternoon, Lara took me for a walk around campus, where signs of decline and dissension were everywhere. GALLETAZO AL PLAN FISCAL, read a slogan spray-painted on a chipped concrete wall. With a loud crack, Lara slapped his hands together.
“Galletazo is like a slap in the face,” he translated.
The semester had just begun, and Lara had noticed a marked decrease in the number of students around campus, which he attributed to fewer scholarships and sharp tuition increases, as dictated by the oversight board. He is 68 years old and suspects he will never see his pension.
Outside a classroom building, Lara and I passed one of his students, Gabriel Negrón, a curly-haired 19-year-old student leader. He was in the middle of painting an American flag with a Spanish slogan decrying “thievery and piracy.” The next day, I saw him waving it at the rally outside the federal courthouse, where protesters chanted slogans attacking la junta and hedge funds. “The vultures,” Negrón said, “are just going to keep draining Puerto Rico.”
Alix is the retired founder of, and largest shareholder in, a corporate-bankruptcy consulting firm in direct competition with McKinsey. Typically, bankruptcy consultants and lawyers file sworn statements disclosing dozens if not hundreds of client relationships. Yet McKinsey’s were brief and opaque and hardly appeared to capture the vast scope of the global consulting firm’s client network. After a series of frustrating meetings with McKinsey executives, Alix decided to launch his own investigation. He formed a shell company and bought unsecured debt in several businesses for which McKinsey was acting as a bankruptcy consultant, and then he began agitating for more disclosure in court. When the firm complied, grudgingly, scores of potential conflicts of interest were discovered. Alix promptly filed a federal lawsuit claiming that McKinsey was a “criminal enterprise” engaging in bankruptcy fraud.
Alix’s probe soon ventured beyond the narrow realm of bankruptcy, peering into a rarely discussed part of the firm: the McKinsey Investment Office. Founded in the 1980s to manage partners’ retirement money, the MIO has some $12 billion in assets. It invests some of the money in outside hedge funds and manages some itself. A 2016 Financial Times report revealed the MIO’s in-house hedge fund had turned a profit in 24 of the past 25 years — and Alix didn’t think that the stellar track record was a coincidence.“The MIO,” he said in a deposition, “is central to the business model of McKinsey & Company.”
McKinsey has long compared the MIO to a blind trust over which its consulting wing has no control. Yet last year, spurred by Alix, a Justice Department regulator investigated the MIO and concluded that it was not, in fact, operating as a blind trust: The partner who founded McKinsey’s subsidiary focused on bankruptcy also sat on the MIO’s board and served on the committee that oversaw investment decisions. McKinsey agreed to settle the DOJ’s case by paying $15 million without conceding fault.
One of the bankruptcies the MIO had an interest in was Puerto Rico’s. Last fall, the Times reported the MIO had a significant investment in Puerto Rican debt. The resulting outcry, in Congress and Puerto Rico, forced the oversight board to hire yet another consultant, a law firm, which released the February report concluding the MIO operated independently and that there was “no evidence” McKinsey’s consultants “knew about this direct investment, let alone altered their behavior because of it.” Moreover, the report said, McKinsey’s failure to disclose the investment wasn’t illegal, because PROMESA doesn’t require the same disclosures as bankruptcy law. “We just don’t think about MIO as part of our work,” Chappuis said. He told me his team had been taken by “complete surprise.”
“I wish people could actually shadow our team for a few days,” he continued. “I guarantee you their heads would blow up with the complexity and intensity of the task in Puerto Rico. I wish people could also see the from-to.” That pushmi-pullyu term was the consultant’s way of saying “progress.”
Proceeds from the musical were going to benefit hurricane-ravaged arts groups, but the event doubled as a celebration of the progress Chappuis wished the rest of America could see. As Miranda took his bows at the end of the show, he wrapped himself in a Puerto Rican flag. Afterward, he attended a rum-soaked party at a fancy office complex owned by one of the production’s sponsors, Banco Popular. Puerto Rico’s tourism sector is starting to revive. (The Times named the island its top destination for 2019.) New federal assistance, such as a program that designates the entire island as an “opportunity zone,” will offer a lucrative tax break for investments in small businesses, real estate, and the like. And Hurricane Maria, ironically enough, has generated an unexpected windfall. The current fiscal plan estimates Puerto Rico will receive $82 billion in disaster relief and predicts a substantial stimulus effect. Tax revenues increased by $540 million owing to recovery-related activity in 2018, the board estimates.
“The debate now is about the magnitude of the windfall,” said Brad Setser, an economist at the Council on Foreign Relations, who worked on PROMESA as a Treasury Department official. “And whether the windfall goes to creditors or Puerto Rico.”
This is the biggest unknown in McKinsey’s calculations, and it’s subject to highly unpredictable forces. First, Trump is vehemently opposed to giving Puerto Rico the $82 billion it anticipates, and if the figure is lower, the economic stimulus will be smaller. Second, whatever the size of the boost to tax revenue, how it’s allotted will be determined in court. The bankruptcy proceeding is a bloody battle involving many types of bonds and classes of creditors, each with varying legal claims. Some bondholders contend that Puerto Rico is simply trying to wriggle out of paying back the money it borrowed, and they want McKinsey and the board to get tough with the government. “Even though they are there to be the debt collectors, they’re doing a lousy job of it,” said Cate Long, a former financial journalist who now runs an analysis firm that works for some of the creditors.
Gradually, the oversight board and its expensive lawyers are hashing out deals with different groups of bondholders. Each settlement leaves a little less for McKinsey to work with in the fiscal plan. “What are we getting for the money?” Lara asked, referring to McKinsey’s consulting fees. “You get the colonial affront, you get the high cost, and you don’t get the product. That is probably the worst part.”
But Chappuis said things are beginning to change for the better: “The root system is taking hold. We just need to keep pushing through for the plant to start showing green shoots.” Whatever critics might say, he saw tangible improvement over the past two years in longtime problem areas such as fiscal management, education, and the power authority, which will soon be privatized. “We believe that addressing these foundational elements is the really tough work of transformation. Very few people have vocations for it in political administrations because they don’t have incentives to think in more than four-year stints.”
While some might consider the signs of a short-term economic revival a reason to dial down the austerity measures, Chappuis said the stimulus projections have only strengthened McKinsey’s case for transformation. “We’re going to have three or four good years. Let’s take advantage of them to right the ship.” Of course, that presumes that Trump is bluffing and the government aid is coming, that the courts will rule favorably, and that reality will bend to McKinsey’s rational analysis.
Polls might show that the fiscal plan is deeply unpopular, but Chappuis said he thought the board could still win over his fellow Puerto Ricans. “I’ve talked to the Uber drivers, the taxi drivers, the people. I hear everybody saying, ‘Of course we need someone to come in and fix this mess.’ ” If a solution is ever found, if a deal is ever done, McKinsey is sure to be in the room where it happens.
*A version of this article appears in the April 15, 2019, issue of New York Magazine. Subscribe Now!
Andrew Rice



Apr. 17, 2019
Trump Aides Worry Mueller Report Will Expose Them As Leakers

In the countdown to the release of the redacted Mueller report on Thursday, Trump’s staffers have several reasons to worry, even if the president reportedly remains unfazed. First, there’s all the work to do summarizing the 300-plus page report for a president who is “unlikely” to read it, just as he’s unlikely to read anything longer than a news chyron. Second, CNN reports that aides anticipate a post-Mueller meltdown from the president, assuming that the special counsel’s findings conflict with his claims of “total exoneration.” But perhaps most troubling for White House aides is the likelihood that the report will reveal them as a source of negative information about the president — the type of admission Trump might call a leak.
According to NBC News, White House aides and former officials fear that the Mueller report will out them as sources of information that would embarrass the president. Aides have reportedly asked the special counsel’s office if “the names of those who cooperated” will be redacted, but the Justice Department has “refused to elaborate.”
One source who spoke to NBC News said there is “breakdown-level anxiety” among some staffers who cooperated with the investigation, despite doing so at the direction of Trump’s legal team. “You have a whole bunch of former White House officials and current White House officials, but especially former White House officials, who were told to cooperate,” one ex-staffer said. “So people went and did that, and now the uncertainty is just how much of that information is going to be in that report and how identifiable to individuals is it going to be. And nobody knows.”
The ex-staffer added: “Even if names are redacted or names aren’t in the report to begin with, it could be situations people were asked about and they answered truthfully that at least for some people — specifically the president — would be identifiable because the situation applies to just one person.”
“Nobody has any idea what this is going to look like on Thursday,” the former official told NBC News. But if the release of the Mueller report shakes out as poorly as Trump’s team fears it will, the Department of Homeland Security might not be the only wing of the Trump administration to see a purge in April.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 16, 2019
Biden May Have Buried the Old Democratic Party He Grew Up In Along With Fritz Hollings

I have no way of knowing if Joe Biden intended to subtly allude to his own controversial “evolution” as a policy-maker and an individual in his eulogy for his close senatorial friend Fritz Hollings in South Carolina. But Jonathan Martin’s account of the event sure draws the comparison:
And the importance of Biden’s conveying “growth” and “evolution” isn’t limited to racial issues but extend to his understanding of whole new generations of voters:
You can start with the strength of Biden’s long-standing connections in South Carolina, built in part on his relationship with Hollings. Will the younger, heavily African-American Democratic voters of this state look at Biden and see a reflection of Barack Obama, whose 2008 nomination was punctuated by a big two-to-one win in the Palmetto State? Or will they see someone even older and more compromised by history than the candidate Obama trounced, Hillary Clinton? It’s a complicated question. Clinton came back to beat Bernie Sanders in South Carolina by nearly a three-to-one margin in 2016. But Biden will face not just Sanders but the very organized Elizabeth Warren, two young African-American pols (Cory Booker and Kamala Harris), plus younger alternatives to his own self as a party unifying non-socialists with some white working-class appeal (Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar, and possibly Beto O’Rourke).
As far as we know, none of these rivals will have to explain away friendships with segregationists, vocal opposition to school busing, heavy involvement in crafting harsh crime legislation, and yeoman service on behalf of the financial-services industry, among other items on Biden’s long résumé. In Biden’s defense, such current-day heresies were the product of an entirely different era of Democratic politics, in which the party’s survival in the South, and in border states like Biden’s own Delaware, often involved fighting like hell for policy basics like equal rights for African-Americans and the very existence of public education and other public services — with virtually everything else being regarded as negotiable. I grew up in the Deep South in that milieu and understand it; leaders like Bill Clinton, regarded as triangulating calculators outside the region, seemed refreshingly progressive to us. But this era is rapidly passing from the scene, even in the South, where a new breed of progressive politician, like Stacey Abrams, Andrew Gillum, and, yes, Beto O’Rourke, is beginning to replace the older set of Boll Weevil/Blue Dog Democratic pols who expected minority voters to quietly go along as they very gradually “evolved.”
No, Joe Biden was never as conservative as many of his senatorial friends, but you have to wonder if his potential base of support in places like South Carolina — absent some intervention on his behalf by Obama himself — is literally dying out. Perhaps not; Democrats there may regard him simply as more electable than his rivals, much as many of them do elsewhere. But if Biden is not careful in completing his own “evolution” on matters of urgent concern to today’s Democratic coalition, he could discover he is burying his own career when he says good-bye to the survivors of traditions that few today will find worthy of nostalgia — or even relevant.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 16, 2019
Is Pete Buttigieg Literally Parks and Rec’s Ben Wyatt?

It’s a question worthy of FBI agent Burt Macklin himself: Why does Democratic presidential candidate Pete Buttigieg seem so familiar? America, after all, has never seen a 37-year-old, multilingual, Harvard- and Oxford-educated, married, gay veteran and small-city mayor run for president before. But viewers of the sitcom Parks and Recreation, which ran for seven seasons on NBC, have noticed some striking similarities between the South Bend, Indiana, mayor and the fictional Ben Wyatt, a nerdy state auditor who makes his home in Pawnee, Indiana. Below, we examine the evidence that Mayor Pete is the real-life incarnation of the fictional Leslie Knope–loving mayor turned possible U.S. president.
As Wyatt explained: “When I was 18, I ran for mayor of my small town and won … Here’s the thing, though, about 18-year-olds. They’re idiots. So I pretty much ran the place into the ground and after two months got impeached.”
At 29, Buttigieg was sworn in as mayor of his hometown. He has not, as of this writing, bankrupted South Bend by building a winter sports complex.
It’s not as stirring as Knope’s speech endorsing her husband’s congressional campaign, but Buttigieg still deserves the Indiana Organization of Women’s coveted “Woman of the Year” award for letting Poehler speak her mind.
As Buttigieg pointed out, he’s been recognized by the Indiana Parks and Recreation Association.
And Wyatt’s been embraced by his wife’s co-workers in the Pawnee Department of Parks and Recreation (well, sort of).
During his two bouts of unemployment, Ben Wyatt produced one five-second claymation video and the Cones of Dunshire, a board game so popular that people have played it in real life.
Buttigieg has yet to produce his own multiplayer, figurine-based, strategy-fantasy game, but his love of board games — particularly those with “punishingly intricate” rules — is well documented.
In other words, Buttigieg is not a guy who’s going to forget about the essence of the game.
Okay, did Chasten Buttigieg ever launch a campaign to save his favorite diner? Not that we’re aware of. Has he ever told a waitress he’ll need “two hours worth of waffles”? Probably not. Did he serve waffles at his wedding? No, but in a Knopian move, the reception was catered by a variety of local food vendors. And Chasten appears to be a man who appreciates the joy and healing properties of breakfast foods.
Last month, Mayor Pete brought tears to Nick Offerman’s eyes with a letter expressing support for South Bend’s Muslim community:
While Ben Wyatt had Ron Swanson at “we’re going to gut the town’s budget with a machete.”
A December Buttigieg profile in Indianapolis Monthly revealed there’s more Mayor Pete–Ben Wyatt crossover:
Even more significantly, Chasten confirmed that his husband is Ben Wyatt … or someone from Pawnee:
It’s unclear what this means. Is Mayor Pete good at woodworking? Has he converted his savings to gold and buried it around South Bend? Does he secretly think the government is inefficient and should be dissolved? Hopefully Chasten will elaborate someday, preferably by compiling a color-coded binder.
Margaret Hartmann



Apr. 16, 2019
The Democratic Party Is Fighting to Keep Representatives It Needs to Lose

Representative Dan Lipinski has spoken repeatedly at the March for Life. He’s sponsored 54 separate piece of anti-abortion legislation in Congress, according to one analysis produced by Planned Parenthood. He voted against the Affordable Care Act, and the DREAM Act, which would have created a path to permanent citizenship for undocumented youth brought to the United States as children. And in March, mere months after he survived a strong primary challenge, he refused to co-sponsor the Equality Act, which, if it ever becomes law, would expand discrimination protections to LGBT people.
For a Republican, Lipinski’s legislative record would hardly be newsworthy. But he is not a Republican. He is a Democrat, and the primary challenge he survived came from his left. On Tuesday, that challenger, Marie Newman, formally launched a second primary race against Lipinski. Newman, who is pro-choice and pro-LGBT rights, lost the 2018 primary to Lipinski, but came within 2,200 votes of the seven-term incumbent — a result that does not indicate rousing support for the conservative Catholic in his Illinois district. She has a real chance to win the nomination, but there are obstacles in her path. One was placed there by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, despite its ostensible commitment to abortion rights. The organization has already announced that it will “neither contract with nor recommend” vendors that work to oust incumbent Democrats, the National Journal reported in March.
The DCCC says that its new policy simply formalizes standards that were already in place. But the party will potentially put Newman at a disadvantage, and not for the first time. Newman’s first matchup with Lipinski also pitted the national party’s leadership against its grassroots allies. The DCCC supported Lipinski; so did then-Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi. Planned Parenthood backed Newman, as did NARAL Pro-Choice America, SEIU, and the American Federation of Teachers. If Newman picks up a similar collection of endorsements for her second run, the party will find itself working against some of its biggest allies to protect the seat of an anti-abortion man from a pro-choice woman candidate.
A second Newman campaign threatens to expose the anti-democratic implications of the party’s strategy. There is a thin sliver logic underneath the DCCC’s unwavering support for incumbents; the party needs to keep control of the House, and it believes left-wing candidates could jeopardize that goal if they run in conservative districts. But this logic doesn’t even apply to Lipinski or his district. Much like Representative Henry Cuellar of Texas, another Blue Dog Democrat who may face a primary from his left, Lipinski represents a thoroughly Democratic district. Democrats there voted for Bernie Sanders in the party’s primary, and the district itself voted for Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump by a comfortable margin. There’s no reason to think the district would suddenly turn Republican if the more left-wing Newman defeated Lipinski in the primary. In fact, the local GOP is in such disarray that it couldn’t marshal an alternative to Art Jones, an unrepentant neo-Nazi who ran unchallenged in the party’s primary before losing badly to Lipinski in the general.
There are other reasons to think that Lipinski’s conservative politics are extraneous to his victories. Democratic candidates in other suburban districts flipped seats without running on anti-abortion platforms, and Lipinski did not rise to power on the strength of a conservative message. Rather, he’s in office partly because he had the good fortune to be the son of Bill Lipinski, who had represented the same district in Congress for 12 years. As the Chicago Tribune initially reported in 2004, the senior Lipinski essentially bequeathed the seat to his son; by the time he publicly announced his retirement, he’d “cleared the way” for junior’s succession, “courting support from members of the district’s special slating committee.” The Tribune called Dan Lipinksi’s eventual nomination “a foregone conclusion, as no other possible candidate showed up to lobby for support.” The maneuverings of the father spared the son the indignity of a primary, since the local committee appointed him directly as the nominee. Dan Lipinski’s career isn’t proof of his district’s socially conservative bona fides as much as it’s an example of political nepotism.
Lipinski isn’t anti-abortion because it’s what his constituency demands. He’s anti-abortion by choice. If party leaders back him over Newman — and penalize contractors who work for Newman’s campaign — they won’t just undermine a political cause they claim to prize. They’ll uphold nepotism, keep a woman out of the party’s delegation, and chill the democratic process. And for what? Dan Lipinski’s district doesn’t need him, and neither does his party.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 16, 2019
Why ‘Civility’ Protects Dan Crenshaw But Not Ilhan Omar

Calls for “civility” in politics are as likely to elicit ridicule as they are plaudits these days, due in large part to their repeated deployment in the face of escalating state violence. Those who insist that, for example, former Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen has the right to dine at restaurants without being confronted by angry constituents betray a disconnect in how different Americans view accountability for government officials: Some feel that locking children in cages makes Nielsen fair game for a public reckoning, no matter when or where she is; others believe that her job entitles her to a respectful distance between her life as a public figure and as a private citizen.
Where one falls on this spectrum in any given instance is often, but not always, a partisan calculation. Representative Andy Barr of Kentucky provides a recent example of how malleable the standards can be. There was nothing civil about Barr’s Republican colleague, Dan Crenshaw, implying last week that Ilhan Omar said the 9/11 terrorist attacks were trivial events, setting in motion a right-wing outrage cycle that culminated in an inflammatory video tweeted by the president and death threats against the congresswoman. Yet it was Crenshaw whom Barr saw fit to defend in the name of civility after Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez accused him of “[drumming] resentment” toward Omar. “Your recent comments about Congressman Crenshaw demonstrate a lack of civility that is becoming far too common in the U.S. House of Representatives,” Barr wrote in a letter to the Bronx congresswoman demanding an apology, which he then tweeted to the public.
Ocasio-Cortez’s incivility, in Barr’s view, stemmed from her claim that Crenshaw has done little to support 9/11 victims or curb right-wing domestic terrorism, which of late has killed more Americans than any other kind. A former Navy SEAL, Crenshaw is one of many Republican members of Congress who have not supported renewing the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund. Their reticence has placed its survival on shaky ground, even as the number of incoming claims rises to unprecedented levels. “In 2018, right-wing extremists were behind almost all U.S. domestic terror killings,” Ocasio-Cortez added. “Why don’t you go do something about that.” Barr addressed this claim by pointing to Crenshaw’s military service in Afghanistan. “Not only has Congressman Crenshaw ‘done something’ to combat terrorism, he was wounded by an improvised explosive device (IED) while serving.”
Enlisting in the armed forces has little to do with combating white-supremacist extremism domestically — which, on the contrary, has found plenty of foot soldiers among both active and former service members. Nor is Barr an ideal ambassador for defending the military’s merits: One of his more famous attack lines in the 2018 midterms against his Democratic opponent — Amy McGrath, a former Marine combat aviator — entailed equating his service as a politician with hers as a soldier, and then contrasting the two by saying his was a job “where ideas matter.” In fact, Barr did not engage substantively with any of Ocasio-Cortez’s critiques — which was the point, really. He seemed interested in scoring political points against her and little else. In doing so, he made clear that there is little merit to a civility that gives a free pass to Dan Crenshaw for drawing on Islamophobic stereotypes to mischaracterize Omar’s words — especially knowing how beset she is already by right-wing threats — but cries foul when Ocasio-Cortez speaks honestly about his record on the issues that he claims to care about.
Ocasio-Cortez was not taking Crenshaw to task merely because she enjoyed it. She was denouncing a colleague who had warped another colleague’s words to cast her as a terrorist sympathizer. Listening to Omar’s remarks in Los Angeles last month, where she declared that American Muslims like her had been transformed into a perpetual suspect caste because “some people did something” — referencing the handful of Islamists who committed the 9/11 attacks — it requires a profound ungenerosity to interpret them as trivializing the attacks themselves. That is, unless one is predisposed to believe what the right seems intent on propagandizing about the Minnesota congresswoman: that she is somehow linked, or at least sympathetic, to the violent ideology that precipitated 2,997 murders. It is difficult to imagine the blade cutting the other way: As Elizabeth Spiers writes for GQ, plenty of Republicans “refer to 9/11 in passing all the time without rending their clothes, publicly grieving in demonstrative ways, and going out of their way to emphasize that the terrorists were evil. They are allowed to use oblique descriptions like ‘when the towers fell’ or ‘the events of 9/11.’ We all know what they’re talking about, and no one thinks they’re reducing the terrorist attacks to a meaningless abstraction.”
Crenshaw embraced this Islamophobic line of attack anyway. And there is little doubt that doing so has material implications — Omar has said that she receives regular death threats, and the FBI recently arrested a New York man for threatening to “put a bullet in her fucking skull.” President Trump, following Crenshaw’s lead, tweeted a video interspersing her remarks with actual footage of the airplanes colliding with the Twin Towers. Through it all, Andy Barr said nothing. As with the rest of his Republican colleagues, the Kentucky congressman allowed a willful misreading of Omar’s remarks to serve as unchallenged pretext for dubious claims about her loyalty. And he did so knowing the potential dangers and recognizing that plausible deniability — namely, that Crenshaw and Trump did not explicitly call for Omar to be threatened — would shield them from having to take responsibility for whatever happened next.
Barr then invoked the need for civility in navigating the fallout — in particular, to ensure that Crenshaw’s behavior was not cast by Ocasio-Cortez as a referendum on his integrity. But the reality is that it was. If there was any dishonesty or maltreatment from one colleague to another at play here, it was that of the Texas congressman against Ilhan Omar. But good-faith interpretations of a Democratic colleague’s remarks do not fit Barr’s rubric for civility. It is for this reason that his conception of the term is useless, except as a political cudgel for him to use at will. By this definition, the kind of civility that Barr claims is missing in Congress is not missing at all. Bad-faith outcries about civility aimed at deflecting from Republican misdeeds are the order of the day.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 16, 2019
Poll Shows Roy Moore Is Still the Wacko to Beat in Alabama

Control of the U.S. Senate after 2020 is a really big deal. Republicans could help consolidate their hold on the federal judiciary for generations to come if Trump is reelected and they have enough senators to rubber-stamp his nominations. And obviously if there is a new Democratic president, she or he could really use Senate control to confirm appointments and enact legislation. Republicans currently have a three-seat majority in the upper chamber, and though they have many more seats at risk in 2020, including some vulnerable incumbents, they have no senators who are sitting ducks.
But Republicans do think of Democrat Doug Jones of Alabama as a sitting duck, or at least as an accidental senator who won a 2017 special election with smoke, mirrors, a world-class turnout operation, and the great luck of opposing Judge Roy Moore, a career wild man whose rocky judicial career and theocratic views were aggravated by serious allegations of sexually predatory behavior toward very young women.
The good news for Jones is that Moore is seriously considering another Senate run. And the first major poll of GOP and general-election voters in Alabama shows the man who once hauled a sculpture of the Ten Commandments around on the back of a pickup truck is leading the potential field of Republicans.
The reputable Mason-Dixon polling outfit tested Moore against declared candidate U.S. Representative Bradley Byrne and two of his House colleagues who haven’t announced but are being urged to run, Mo Brooks and Gary Palmer. Moore had 27 percent, Brooks 18 percent, Byrne 13 percent, and Palmer 11 percent (two other possible candidates were in the low single digits). The poll did not include former Auburn football coach Tommy Tuberville, who recently indicated he would likely run.
The poll didn’t directly test any of these birds against Jones, though among all registered voters in the survey, his “reelect” number was a vulnerable 40 percent, while his approval/disapproval ratio was a meh 45/44.
While no one in or near the field can match Moore’s ancient right-wing street cred and hard-core constituency of Christian-right loyalists, some of them are no ideological slouches, either. Brooks, who ran third to Moore and appointed Senator Luther Strange (whom Moore defeated in a runoff) in 2017, recently drew attention to himself by comparing Democrats to Hitler’s Nazis (they are both subcategories of “socialists,” you see). Palmer was the longtime president of a right-wing think tank and is a stalwart member of the House Freedom Caucus. Byrne is a standard-brand-conservative Trump loyalist and the least exotic figure considering a Senate run, which is likely a problem for him. No one knows what kind of candidate Tuberville might be; he’s probably best known for coaching in one of the most boring games in recent college-football history, a 3–2 Auburn win over Mississippi State. Here’s what he had to say in a recent interview:
You can tell Tuberville’s a political novice because he referred to the “Democratic” Party, not the “Democrat” or “Democrat Socialist” Party. But he’s reportedly got former Trump press secretary Sean Spicer coaching him, so he probably won’t make that mistake again.
Speaking of Trump, the president is likely to get involved in the Alabama race, though it’s unclear how and when. His 2017 support for Strange, damaged goods because of suspicions that he’d gotten his seat in a corrupt deal with Governor Robert Bentley, who later resigned, was clearly a mistake. The president eventually supported Moore after he became the GOP nominee, and that didn’t work out too well. Brooks is one of those conservatives who said nasty things about Trump when backing Ted Cruz in 2016. Byrne has a similar POTUS problem, having called on Trump to withdraw after the Access Hollywood tape came out. At one point, there was even serious talk of Florida congressman Matt Gaetz, the Trumpiest House member of them all, crossing the state line and running against Jones, but then Gaetz took a pass.
As for Moore, he apparently feels he’s been vindicated by the failure of those who accused him of sexual assault and other misconduct to get him hauled off to the slammer (he’s in a battle of dueling defamation claims against Leigh Corfman, the woman who claimed Moore sexually abused her when she was 14) and believes that without those accusations he would have beaten Jones. The Mason-Dixon poll shows Moore has almost universal name ID, more of it positive or neutral than negative, while nearly half of the Republicans surveyed didn’t recognize Byrne’s name — not a great sign for him given that he made it as far as a GOP runoff (losing to Bentley) in a gubernatorial bid back in 2010. By any conventional standard, you’d figure Moore would never survive a 2020 runoff (Alabama requires a majority for party nominations) against any of his opponents, since he blew the 2017 race and probably won’t face a runoff opponent who is as weak as Strange.
But this is Alabama, a place where Moore is still a revered figure among conservatives after twice being knocked off the state Supreme Court on ethics charges and generally making a spectacle of himself for decades. Anything could happen among Republicans, and after that you can be sure that Democrats will give Jones anything he needs for his reelection campaign. And unless something dramatic changes between now and November of next year, most of the voters who put Jones into office to begin with will be super-energized to return to the polls to smite Trump, if only by denying him a Senate seat.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 16, 2019
Yes, a ‘Glass of Water’ Could Win AOC’s District. That’s Why Progressives Demand More From It.

Since there’s nothing political media folk love more than an intra-Democratic food fight, Nancy Pelosi’s comments at the London School of Economics explaining the fruits of partisan gerrymandering made their way back across the pond with lightning speed, as reflected in the Washington Examiner:
Just to be clear, Pelosi’s right about the noncompetitive nature of her own San Francisco House district and AOC’s in New York: The former is the sixth-most Democratic district according to the Cook Political Report’s Partisan Voting Index (PVI), and the latter is the 31st-most Democratic. Hillary Clinton won 77 percent of the vote in AOC’s district, and Obama won 81 percent in 2012.
Presumably Pelosi thinks that despite her own safe seat, she can understand the plight of Democrats representing swing districts, but apparently has doubts about aggressively progressive members like AOC:
Now Pelosi also had words of praise for her preternaturally talented young colleague. But you have to figure she wishes AOC, who has replaced Pelosi as the principal target of sexist conservative agitprop, had a slightly lower profile.
But what, precisely, has Ocasio-Cortez done to hurt her party? She’s promoted her own policy point of view — which every member should have the right to do — with amazing success. She’s criticized Democrats who join Republicans on key procedural floor votes, and warned them they are making themselves targets for both the left and the right. And she’s expressed support for the leftist group Justice Democrats — who gave her crucial support in her audacious 2018 primary race against one of Pelosi’s lieutenants, Joe Crowley — in their determination to encourage primary challenges to centrist or conservative Democrats in safe blue districts.
It’s unclear how any of this threatens Pelosi’s majority, except insofar as conservatives have sought to identify the entire Democratic Party with this one democratic socialist member’s views — which of course they are going to do in any event. Unless the entire House Democratic Caucus is expected to repeat the party line like cicadas, then there will always be members from districts where a more progressive viewpoint is viable than is politically sustainable everywhere. Their job is precisely to keep pressure on the leadership and the party to represent their constituents, too — not just the swing voters who have very nearly been hunted to extinction. And it doesn’t mean Democrats cannot accommodate candidates and members in more competitive districts with views more appropriate to local conditions. The big-tent principle should, however, work both ways.
If AOC begins threatening primary challenges to loyal Democrats from swing districts who happen to disagree with her ideology or policies, or suggesting Democrats take a dive in national elections if their candidates are too “centrist,” then that’s a clear violation of party discipline and Pelosi would be justified in rebuking her. That hasn’t happened, though. So long as gerrymandering and simple concentration of partisan voters produces safe House seats, however, their valuable function is to produce restless insurgents who stretch the imaginations of their elders rather than time-serving perpetual incumbents who go along to get along. In truth, both Pelosi, the precedent-shattering Speaker, and Ocasio-Cortez, the progressive comet, represent the silver lining of the generally rotten system of partisan gerrymandering: It gives leaders the opportunity to emerge from the crowd of election-fearing pols.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 16, 2019
Some Challengers to Incumbent Presidents Have Been Serious Threats. William Weld Is Not.

When former Massachusetts governor William Weld formed a presidential exploratory committee earlier this year to look at a primary challenge to Donald Trump, some observers seemed to take him seriously. I explained in a rebuttal how insanely out of touch Weld was with the party that he abandoned in 2016 to accept the second spot on the Libertarian Party ticket, and how intensely popular the incumbent is with rank-and-file Republicans (albeit not with the shrinking band of #NeverTrump elites overrepresented in opinion journalism).
But now that Weld has formally announced his candidacy, it’s probably a good time to put his bid into the proper historical context by distinguishing it from serious primary challenges to incumbent presidents.
There have been four post–World War II intraparty challenges to incumbent presidents that represented very serious challenges to their renomination:
* In 1952 Tennessee senator Estes Kefauver beat Harry Truman in the New Hampshire primary, leading directly to Truman’s decision not to seek reelection.
* In 1968, Minnesota senator Eugene McCarthy held Lyndon Johnson to a surprisingly narrow victory in New Hampshire; with polls showing McCarthy would likely defeat Johnson in the next major primary in Wisconsin, and with LBJ focused on the Vietnam War’s damage to his legacy, he folded his tent.
* In 1976, Ronald Reagan came breathtakingly close to denying renomination to Gerald Ford, the appointed vice-president who got the big job when Richard Nixon resigned less than two years earlier. Ford went on to lose narrowly to Jimmy Carter in the general election, and Reagan succeeded Carter four years later.
* In 1980, Ted Kennedy launched a much-anticipated challenge to an unpopular Carter, but foundered due to a series of gaffes and Carter’s skillful use of presidential power. As in the three earlier examples, the incumbent president’s party subsequently lost the general election.
There have been two other occasions where primary challenges represented significant ideological threats to the unity of the incumbent president’s party, if not to his renomination:
* In 1964 Alabama’s segregationist governor, George Wallace, ran against LBJ surrogates in three northern Democratic primaries (Wisconsin, Indiana, and Maryland), losing but doing well enough to shock those who assumed his style of politics wouldn’t travel beyond the Deep South. This was an early distant warning of the civil-rights backlash that ultimately unraveled the New Deal coalition for good.
* In 1992 conservative pundit Pat Buchanan challenged George H.W. Bush, and never won a primary, but did well enough to expose the incumbent’s weak support among conservatives upset at his betrayal of a no-new-taxes pledge. Poppy, of course, lost in the general election.
Weld has none of the intraparty strengths, and Trump has none of the intraparty weaknesses, displayed in any of these six examples. If there is any precedent his challenge to Trump resembles, it’s probably the dual 1972 candidacies of two Republican congressmen opposing Richard Nixon in 1972: antiwar Californian Pete McCloskey, and Ohio conservative John Ashbrook. McCloskey’s 19 percent in New Hampshire represented the peak of this twin challenge; Ashbrook never broke double digits. At the 1972 Republican National Convention, Nixon won 1,347 delegates, with McCloskey winning one, and Ashbrook getting skunked. Weld will be lucky to match Ashbrook.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 15, 2019
From Breezy Beto to Wonky Warren: How Candidates Use Policy

As one might expect from a presidential field as large as the one Democrats are assembling for 2020, there are a variety of approaches to developing, rolling out, and talking about policy proposals. Indeed, given the natural obsession Democrats have about electability in the wake of Hillary Clinton’s shocking loss to Donald Trump in 2016, there’s been quite a bit of buzz about candidates’ policies — or the lack thereof — early in the current cycle.
But there are different ways in which precision or vagueness on policies — and in the latter case, which and how many policies are articulated — are utilized, depending on a particular candidate’s proclivities, identity, and strategic needs. Here are a few variations:
1. Policy As an Ideological Marker. In 2020, as in 2016, Bernie Sanders has been masterful in using a few high-profile specific policy proposals to undergird his self-presentation as a fearless challenger of corporate power and Establishment politics. His relentless advocacy of single-payer health care, tuition-free college, and a high minimum wage have also given him an indirect way to suggest that other Democratic candidates (in 2016 Hillary Clinton, and this year multiple rivals) aren’t so fearless or so independent of unsavory influences. This year he’s added a distinctive foreign-policy viewpoint that doesn’t sound like conventional Democratic rhetoric and helps maintain his credibility as the leading progressive in American politics.
It’s a mark of Sanders’s effectiveness that others in the 2020 field (including fellow senators Cory Booker, Kirsten Gillibrand, Kamala Harris, and Elizabeth Warren) have found it convenient to lend their support to his Medicare for All proposal in order to prove their own progressive bona fides. And it can work the other way, too: Putative “moderate” candidates Amy Klobuchar and John Hickenlooper have made their own unwillingness to go full single-payer their own ideological marker. Down the campaign trail it’s entirely possible that even nuanced differences on other highly symbolic policy proposals like the Green New Deal will carry a lot of implied ideological freight.
2. Policy As Signature. Candidates often roll out a particular policy as a sort of signature of their seriousness, or to identify them with voters concerned about a specific problem. Harris has done that twice: with an early progressive tax proposal, and with a more recent plan to boost teacher pay nationally. Booker’s “baby bonds” proposal is his distinctive approach to fighting income inequality and promoting racial justice. Klobuchar has sought to reinforce her image as a Midwesterner trying to rebuild that economically battered region with an infrastructure investment plan.
And then there are candidates who build their campaigns around a single issue, notably Jay Inslee, who is making climate change his sole preoccupation, and Eric Swalwell, who is doing the same with gun control (if he chooses to run after all, Michael Bloomberg would probably focus his mammoth bankroll on both those issues. And as time goes by, we will see struggling candidates try to reboot their campaigns with “bold” new policy initiatives that cover untrod ground.
3. The Hazy Policy Option: Never Having to Tell Voters You’re Sorry. Presidential candidates running on their personalities, their charisma, or their biographies have long realized that getting down and dirty on policy specifics can alienate potential supporters without necessarily adding much to their appeal. That seems to be the approach being taken so far by two 2020 prospects, Beto O’Rourke and Pete Buttigieg.
Other than both being white men with a particular appeal to younger voters, the two candidates come across quite differently. O’Rourke actually has embraced a lot of specific policies (he was, after all, a three-term House member), but doesn’t talk about them much on the campaign trail, where he emphasizes his empathy for the challenges facing citizens and his eagerness to learn from them, as Politico noted last month:
Some of Beto’s admirers with experience in the Obama administration remind us that the 44th president also dealt with a lot of concerns about policy vagueness in the early days of his 2008 campaign. Whatever its origin, the habit of emphasizing values and broad goals rather than policy specifics helped Obama, and may help O’Rourke, develop support across the usual intraparty ideological lines. That, too, may be one motive for Pete Buttigieg’s lack of focus on detailed policies, though he has been very clear in his belief that voters want compelling “narratives” more than just policy white papers, as Alexander Burns has observed:
Whereas O’Rourke risks giving the impression he’s a lightweight, Buttigieg, with his knowledge of multiple languages and his habit of quoting James Joyce, sometimes seems too cerebral for politics. Being a bit hazy can be complicated, though it does increase strategic flexibility.
4. Policy As Identity. Elizabeth Warren has very deliberately gone about establishing herself as the most policy-intensive candidate in the 2020 field, with detailed proposals on issues ranging from agriculture and technology to banking, public lands, and child care. She’s in effect doubling down on her identity as a brilliant former college professor who could be the perfect antidote to four years of a president who doesn’t read, doesn’t think deeply, and doesn’t bother with facts or logic or arithmetic.
Some observers think this is a mistake insofar as sexist perceptions of Warren as a hectoring schoolmarm is her chief political problem. And there’s even a risk that her tendency to churn out specific policy plans aimed at specific constituencies (e.g., the agribusiness proposal she rolled out in Iowa) could come across as pandering.
On the other hand, Harris is building an impressively coherent agenda around a common core of ideas, mostly involving aggressive efforts to bust up oligarchical corporate structures and monopolistic consolidations. It’s an approach that could wear well on voters and media alike, if she’s not written off early as too substantive for American politics or too female to take on the atavistic warlord in the White House.
And speaking of Donald Trump, he may not be quite as able to shrug off policy matters as he was in 2016, as Elana Schor recently noted:
If Democrats let the objective realities of the Trump presidency guide their policy pronouncements, they should do well.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 15, 2019
Trump Says He’s ‘Always Liked’ Jimmy Carter Despite Insulting Him for Years

With President Trump, you need to give a compliment to get a compliment, as Jimmy Carter learned this weekend after President 39 sent 45 a glowing letter on his handling of the U.S.-China relationship. According to the White House, Carter wrote Trump “a beautiful letter about the current negotiations with China,” after which the two spoke over the phone on Saturday. By Monday, the White House was ready to share the good news: “The President has always liked President Carter and First Lady Rosalynn Carter and extended his best wishes to them on behalf of the American people.”
This is a new tune for President Trump, who has previously called Carter “the worst President in the history of the United States.” Carter, for his part, told the Washington Post in 2017 that the Trump presidency was “a disaster” in terms of “human rights and taking care of people and treating people equal.”
As the Post notes, Trump has sent his fair share of insults toward the oldest living president — most often some repetition of the claim that Carter was the worst U.S. executive until Obama came along. There’s also this odd tweet from 2014:
Of course, when one slings as much trash talk as President Trump does, eventually one must recant some of it. Consider the progress in his relationship with former 2016 rival Ted Cruz, growing in just two short years, from “lyin’ Ted” to “beautiful Ted.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 15, 2019
No, Fentanyl Isn’t a Weapon of Mass Destruction

Faced with a declining federal budget for a division charged with countering weapons of mass destruction, the Department of Homeland Security is considering a proposal to extend the label to fentanyl. Task & Purpose reported on Monday that James F. McDonnell, who heads the department’s WMD division, proposed the change in a February memo to then–DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen. The drug’s “high toxicity and increasing availability” made it “attractive to threat actors seeking nonconventional materials for a chemical weapons attack,” McDonnell wrote. There isn’t much of an evidential basis for classifying fentanyl as a WMD, but McDonnell’s suggestions could still find support for reasons that have nothing to do with science and everything to do with politics.
Fentanyl is a powerful synthetic opioid typically prescribed to patients in acute pain. In its illegally produced version, it can be a potent and often deadly drug, especially when mixed with other substances, like heroin. The prevalence of illegal fentanyl does appear to be driving sharp increases in rates of death by opioid overdose. But as the drug proliferates, so too do myths about its real dangers. McDonnell’s memo fits into an overarching narrative that bestows almost magical properties on fentanyl. A 2017 Bloomberg News feature, which set up and tried to examine the possibility that the opioid could be deployed as a WMD, even claimed that fentanyl “is so potent that even a small amount — the equivalent of a few grains of salt — can be lethal.”
This isn’t really true. You can’t get high or become ill simply by touching fentanyl, but police departments often claim otherwise. They report dramatic, but varied, symptoms that don’t mesh with established scientific evidence about fentanyl and the way it’s absorbed by the human body; one officer in East Liverpool, Ohio, even claimed he could feel his body “shutting down” after brief contact with powdered fentanyl. (The same Bloomberg piece that attributes fatal qualities to minuscule amounts of fentanyl uncritically repeats the officer’s story as fact.) However, physicians have suggested that police officers who say they’ve been sickened by mere exposure to the drug are actually displaying signs of mass sociogenic illness — hysteria, in other words. This isn’t exactly proof that fentanyl would make an effective weapon of mass destruction. In fact, it would be difficult to disperse, and other, deadlier chemical agents already exist.
Right-wing political commitments don’t necessarily motivate all urban legends about fentanyl. The opioid crisis is real, and illicit fentanyl is dangerous. But hysteria can also be politically useful, and this particular outbreak is helpful to Trump. He ran, in part, on a promise to restore law and order to a nation in moral decline. In the fever swamps, immigrants bring this deadly substance over the border en masse; it then sickens police officers and kills innocent Americans. To Trump, fentanyl and opioids categorically are a cudgel. As recently as April 4, he threatened to close the U.S. border with Mexico “if the drugs don’t stop.” Kellyanne Conway, who acts both as a spokesperson for the president and as his “opioids czar,” despite having no experience in public health, said in March that people were ingesting marijuana laced with fentanyl. There isn’t much evidence that fentanyl-laced marijuana is a real problem, as BuzzFeed News reported at the time, but police departments continue to spread the claim in comments to the press and on social media.
So why does McDonnell want to classify fentanyl as a WMD? As Task & Purpose points out in its initial report, funding for DHS’s WMD division has experienced a decline commensurate with the Trump administration’s overweening focus on immigration and the border. “It reads like somebody is laying the administrative background for trying to tap into pots of money for detecting WMD and decontaminating WMD,” one expert told Task & Purpose. “It’s an interdepartmental play for money, that’s all it is.” McDonnell’s memo appeals to the president’s basest instincts. If the ploy works, McDonnell won’t just earn more funding for his division. He could also stoke Trump’s anti-immigration agenda, and open the door to a draconian law-enforcement crackdown — all while the administration largely fails to deliver on its promises to address the opioid epidemic.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 15, 2019
Why Joe Biden’s ‘Obama Strategy’ Is Smart — and Risky

It was always assumed that if Joe Biden decided to run for president for a third time, his service as Barack Obama’s vice-president for eight years would be at the top of his résumé. But as press reports this weekend indicated, there are fresh signs Biden is planning to make the Obama legacy central to his 2020 strategy. For a career pol whose pre–vice-presidential record has received ever-increasing and often-hostile scrutiny — especially from progressives, and particularly from African-Americans — it’s a smart move to act as though he was rebaptized politically in 2008 (it’s the secular equivalent of one of those late-life religious conversions, like the one some Evangelicals believe career heathen Donald Trump has undergone). After all, would a closet bigot serve the first African-American president so loyally? And for that matter, would Michelle Obama’s husband tolerate a vice-president whose “handsiness” wasn’t just an innocent eccentricity?
Biden’s appropriation of the Obama mantle also puts his rivals a bit on the spot. There has been more than a little surreptitious criticism of Obama implicit in the strategic arguments and policy pronouncements of such candidates as Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, and even Pete Buttigieg. But elite progressive disdain for the centrist tradition of the Clintons that Obama arguably continued is not widely shared by the Democratic rank and file, who continue to adore the man. So clinging to him is an effective ideological as well as personal self-defense mechanism for Biden.
The bigger question is whether it will work. It’s worth remembering that Biden’s pre-Obama record basically doesn’t exist for a lot of voters, as political scientist Joel Goldstein recently noted:
So Biden’s opposition to school busing in the 1970s, or his votes against abortion rights early in the 1980s, or his mishandling of the Clarence Thomas hearings, or his sponsorship of a troubling crime bill in the 1990s just aren’t part of the perception of Uncle Joe in the minds of many actual voters, particularly low-information voters. And while lefty critics (and right-wing opportunists) will continue to bring it all up, it’s unclear how much his standing will be affected; the latest evidence of inappropriate behavior toward women hasn’t hurt him at all so far).
On the other hand, the idea that in Joe Biden Democrats can just reboot the Obama campaign of 2008 runs into some pretty sizable psychological barriers that have nothing to do with Biden’s ideological heresies, as an Associated Press article on the subject pointed out:
The former veep may be a reassuring alternative to fellow-septuagenarian Donald Trump, but he isn’t inherently very hopey-changey.
But most of all, making his partnership with Obama the strategic centerpiece of his own presidential campaign exposes Biden to the huge risk associated with constant scrutiny of Obama’s (and his former staff’s) own less-than-excited attitude toward the aspirations of his former veep, as my colleague Matt Stieb has observed:
Obama’s political associates are all over the place heading into 2020; a conspicuous number of them, particularly in Iowa, seem to be gravitating toward Beto O’Rourke. You can certainly envision a moment down the road when the ghost of the Obama administration becomes less than an unmixed blessing for its best-known alumnus.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 15, 2019
Everything We Know About the Release of the Mueller Report

On Thursday, the Justice Department plans to release a redacted version of Robert Mueller’s report on Russian election interference and the Trump campaign, a spokesperson said Monday.
The long-awaited report will be handed over to both Congress and the public on Thursday morning, DOJ spokesperson Kerri Kupec said. The following day will mark four weeks since Mueller turned his report over the Justice Department. In that time, the only details the public, or members of Congress, have gotten about Mueller’s report have come from a four-page summary written by Barr three days after Mueller turned in the report. Barr wrote that Mueller did not find a criminal conspiracy between the Russian government and the Trump campaign. He also wrote that Mueller did not make a conclusion about Trump’s alleged obstruction of justice.
In a letter written to Congress in late March, Barr explained that he was delaying the release of the report to redact sensitive information, including grand jury testimony and classified information. Prosecutors from Mueller’s office, along with other law enforcement officials, helped with that. Barr outlines in his letter the type of information that will be redacted:
Barr told a Senate subcommittee last week that the redactions will be color-coded.
The Justice Department has cast blame on Mueller for the delay in the report’s release. In a statement last week, the DOJ said every page of the Mueller report contains a warning that grand jury testimony may be included. Because of that, Barr had to take care to redact the report before releasing it, the statement said.
Some Democrats are worried that Barr will use his powers of redaction to block information just because it’s embarrassing to Trump or his allies.
Once the redacted version of the report is made public, House Judiciary Committee chairman Jerry Nadler, a Democrat, is planning to “very quickly” subpoena the grand jury testimony that DOJ has left out. “I assume we will get the redacted report within a week. When we do so, if we don’t get everything, we will issue the subpoena and go to court,” Nadler said last week.
California Democrat Adam Schiff, the House Intelligence chairman, is also attempting to obtain the grand jury testimony. Last week, he said a formal request had been made to for “all of the information and findings in the counterintelligence investigation.”
Trump’s team has also promised to release a rebuttal as soon as the DOJ puts out Mueller’s report. In the works since last August, the counter report will focus on the origins of the Mueller probe and argue against allegations of obstruction justice by President Trump. At a reported 140 pages, the counter report is reportedly being pared down to 50 pages.
One of the initial big mysteries about the Mueller report was its length, and whether the four pages Barr used to summarize it were really enough. Barr has said that the report is 400 pages long, and that doesn’t count tables and appendices.
This post has been updated throughout. 
Adam K. Raymond



Apr. 15, 2019
Report: Trump Asked Tiger Woods for His Thoughts on Tax Reform

It’s been a big month on the Trump golf beat. At the beginning of April, sportswriter Rick Reilly released Commander in Cheat: How Golf Explains Trump, a slim, fun book with an abundance of detail on how in sport, as in life, the president can’t help but bend the rules in his favor. Now, in a new report from Politico, more details emerge on the president’s relationship with his favorite pastime: according to TrumpGolfCount, he has hit the links at least 116 times in his 814 days in office, a little less than once a week.
Politico notes that Trump uses the game as both an escape from the presidency and as a roving version of his “Executive time”: “unscripted hours in which his presidency unfolds in spontaneous conversations, phone calls, and occasional policy chats with athletes and celebrities.” One instance stands out: In 2017, amid the Republican tax overhaul, Trump reportedly asked Tiger Woods for his thoughts on a tax bill moving through Congress.
Both Republicans and foreign officials see their tee times as opportunities to lobby the president. Acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney has reportedly used his outings with the president as a way to get on his good side, while Republican senators like Lindsey Graham and Rand Paul have golfed with Trump to get a word in on policy. “Don’t forget that the president and Lindsey Graham weren’t exactly pals at the end of the campaign,” a senior White House official told Politico. “Frankly, they’ve developed their relationship largely because of playing golf.”
As for foreign policy, Trump has golfed with Shinzo Abe three times on the Japanese prime minister’s visits to Mar-a-Lago, and once with the Australian ambassador to the U.S. “Some ambassadors in Europe have begged me to tell them what they need to do to nail a golfing opportunity with President Trump, even for one hole,” a senior government official told the Japan Times in April 2018.
For a man who loves to spend other people’s money, Trump, oddly enough, hasn’t used golf as a fundraising tactic all that often. Though Trump has held private events at his golf clubs, the president is apparently hesitant to turn his personal time on the course into a conduit for campaign money. Apparently, he hasn’t needed to, either: On Sunday, the Trump campaign announced a $30 million haul in the first quarter, almost $12 million more than the closest 2020 Democrat.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 14, 2019
Trump Raises $30 Million in First Quarter, Smashing Democratic Numbers

In the first quarter of 2019, President Trump raised a self-reported $30 million for his reelection campaign, blazing past the fundraising totals of Democratic candidates. It appears his plan to file reelection paperwork on the night of his inauguration has paid off: In addition to the $30 million raised by the campaign, the Republican National Committee has reportedly raised $46 million for their 2020 candidate. According to RNC chairwoman Ronna McDaniel, the campaign’s had eight seven-figure days in 2019 and 100,000 new donors since January.
With their donor bases intact and no primary challengers to split up donors, incumbents enjoy natural fundraising advantages; still, Trump is significantly outpacing his Democratic rivals. As NBC News notes, Trump raised more in the first quarter than the top two Democrats combined — Bernie Sanders with $18.2 million, and Kamala Harris with $12 million. In total, the eight Democrats who have reported their first-quarter numbers have raised a combined $65.8 million, far less than Trump’s $82 million total of his own fundraising and the RNC money.
As CNN reports, almost 99 percent of donations to the campaign were $200 or less, with an average donation of $34.26. More than the $30 million number, those small donations should catch Democrats’ attention. As primary candidates like Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren reject big-ticket fundraising in favor of small, individual donors, it appears that the president could be running their game more effectively — while still raking in serious PAC money. And after the long primary process, the Trump campaign will have much of its fundraising intact for the main haul. Speaking of Trump’s rivals, a campaign official told NBC News that, after the primary, “We expect them to be bruised, battered, and broke.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 14, 2019
What Changes When the Presidential Field Is Full of Mothers, Not Just Fathers

Our political history is built around fathers — starting with the forefathers. In the White House alone, we’ve had fathers of one, fathers of 15 (hey, John Tyler), and fathers of none (six presidents have had no children of their own, though some of those, including George Washington, have raised stepchildren). But the perceptions of their fatherhood haven’t mattered that much, largely because the fact of their fatherhood wasn’t necessarily central to their public or political stature.
March began with the presidential rollout of former Texas representative Beto O’Rourke. A Vanity Fair cover story kicked off with a remarkable detail: his 8-year-old son, Henry, announcing from the back seat of the family car, “Dad, if you run for president, I’m going to cry all day.” Days later, a Washington Post story included the observation that O’Rourke’s recent Senate campaign had been particularly hard on his 12-year-old son, Ulysses, the only one of his three children “old enough to remember a time before Congress, a time when his father was around a lot more often.”
Most of the profiles of O’Rourke have covered his obsession with Joseph Campbell, the Odyssey, and Star Wars, stories built around a hero’s quest in which there is no particular interest in the Penelopes back home. O’Rourke, we are meant to understand, is also on a hero’s quest.
In his first days of campaigning, O’Rourke joked repeatedly about how his wife, Amy, had been caring for their three children, “sometimes with my help.” Between his Senate and presidential runs, O’Rourke, questioning his purpose in the wake of his loss to Ted Cruz, had gone on a road trip. During the trip, he’d posted meandering journal entries on Medium, including one in which he recalled searching for human connection in Kansas while his wife was back in Texas working as a parent to his children.
“I called Amy,” he’d written. “Kids were in the car, she was a little distracted, we didn’t connect either. Maybe you could meet people at a bar she said as we hung up.” Meanwhile, Amy described her children’s own search for connection with their dad, how sad they’d been when their calls to him kept going to voice mail, and how she’d finally urged them to try writing him letters instead of calling.
Of course, no female candidate who hoped to gain an ounce of public approval could have survived that first sentence in the Vanity Fair story: the plaintive wail of a child whose misery was tied to the political ambitions of his parent. No woman, dead or alive, could hope to win the nation’s heart by writing about seeking communion in a Kansas City bar while her husband drove carpool in El Paso. Just five years ago, Wendy Davis, another Democratic candidate with an enthusiastic following, ran for office in Texas. During the 2014 gubernatorial race, the New York Times Magazine ran a story headlined “Can Wendy Davis Have It All? A Texas-Size Tale of Ambition, Motherhood, and Political Mythmaking.”
It’s hard not to consider how snugly that Texas-size tale of ambition, fatherhood, and political mythmaking might fit a profile of O’Rourke — and how inconceivable it is that the question of whether he could have it all would ever get slapped across his image. Davis, like O’Rourke, was a sometimes-absent parent on an improbable journey, in her case from an impoverished childhood to a Harvard Law degree and an ambitious political career. But for her, there was no way to tell a tale of herself as heroic without the separations from her kids becoming the defining frame — and punishing moral — of the story. Davis lost.
The obsessive tallying of days Davis had spent away from her family reminded me of a 1984 interview of then-vice-presidential candidate Geraldine Ferraro in which her husband had assured Barbara Walters that his wife had missed only two weekends with her kids in over six years in Congress. This was what it was going to be to have women vying for political power long held mostly — only — by men; there would be anxious tabulations of the days, nights, and weekends they had spent away from their families.
The tight knot for women in politics (and perhaps in life) has been, will always be, this: Everything associated with motherhood has been coded as faintly embarrassing and less than — from mom jeans to mommy brain to the Resistance. And yet to be a bad mom has been disqualifying, and to not be a mom at all is to be understood as lacking something: gravity, value, femininity. Just this month, Tucker Carlson wondered, about New York representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, whether “someone who’s never even raised children gets the right to lecture me about morality,” as if parents are given a moral compass upon the birth of a child.
Fatherhood for male politicians so far has, for the most part, worked only as a bonus. It’s been a way to show off the shiny white teeth of a strong gene pool and an escape hatch from a job you’re getting fired from — in order to spend more time with your family! It’s been a way for powerful men to signal respect for women without evincing femininity themselves: They are the fathers of daughters, folks. At its best, presenting publicly as a committed father has offered an opportunity for men who otherwise cast themselves as tough and authoritative to demonstrate their tender side.
Joe Biden, who is expected to enter the presidential fray any day now, has been publicly beloved specifically as a dad because the 1972 deaths of his wife and baby daughter left him raising two sons, alone and with his second wife, Jill. More recently, the 2015 loss of his adult son Beau to brain cancer made him a powerful transmitter of intimate grief on a national scale.
Even unconventional paternal history has not been brought to bear against men in the way it has against women. Vermont senator Bernie Sanders’s son, Levi, is most frequently pictured sitting on his dad’s lap as a toddler in the ’70s. That Sanders did not live with the mother of his son, that for years he did not correct press reports that Levi was the product of a first marriage, that Levi called his father “Bernard” from early childhood … these quirks haven’t mattered to Sanders’s campaign, as they should not — but as they certainly would have were he a woman. Donald Trump’s wretchedness as a president is rarely tied to his wretchedness as a father.
But as our expectations for fatherhood rise, even when the fathers castigate themselves for absences, the judgment hasn’t been harsh. Barack Obama openly acknowledged his familial shortfalls in The Audacity of Hope, where he wrote about how, when he ran for Congress in 2000, leaving Michelle at home to care for their two young children, her “anger at me seemed barely contained.” So a man whose first book was about the search for connection with his father was candid about the ways he had often been absent as a parent, and no one cared.
I thought about that again this week, when I recalled how California representative Eric Swalwell had spoken so openly last year of his qualms about running for the Democratic presidential nomination given that he had a new daughter, Cricket, born in October, and another child who is under 2. “It would be hard to be away during the early, developing years of their lives,” he said in November. Here, I thought, was a new view of fatherhood, one in which that work-life-balance, have-it-all judgment (and self-judgment) would apply to men. Last week, Swalwell announced his candidacy.
How can we get to a place where women’s relationships to their domestic lives are not undermining? Those who’ve been out there have tried a million approaches. Nancy Pelosi speaks often of how her time raising five children equipped her to be in politics: “I became so energized and efficient in the use of time and willing to delegate, to the children, responsibilities,” she told the Washington Post earlier this year, gently undermining the metaphorical children to whom she now delegates.
But Pelosi has also noted the relationship between motherhood and the shape and timing of women’s political careers. In 2012, when 27-year-old Luke Russert asked Pelosi whether her insistence on continuing to lead her party crowded out younger leaders, the then-72-year-old took him to task. “I came to Congress when my youngest child, Alexandra, was a senior in high school,” Pelosi said. “I knew that my male colleagues had come when they were 30. They had a jump on me because they didn’t have children.” But of course they had children; there was simply no expectation that they’d be responsible for raising them.
In the 2020 field, multiple women are making reference to their own experiences as mothers to push for progressive policies that would specifically help parents. Minnesota senator Amy Klobuchar has spoken of how she got into politics after she was forced to leave the hospital less than a day after giving birth to her daughter in 1995 and pushed for a bill that guaranteed 48-hour hospital stays for new mothers. When Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren, whose children are adults, talks about her subsidized-day-care proposal, she speaks with detailed ferocity about her own experiences of having been a parent with a job (as did Hillary Clinton). She often describes how the question of whether she’d be able to attend law school hinged on whether she could get her youngest child potty trained, and thus into the day-care facility she and her husband could afford. “I stand before you today,” Warren likes to say, “courtesy of three bags of M&Ms and a cooperative toddler.”
Kirsten Gillibrand, in a different phase of motherhood, takes pains to make clear that her responsibilities are not on hold while she’s on the presidential campaign trail; she regularly invites reporters to watch her cook dinner at home and posts social-media stories of her 10-year-old son, Henry, tagging around after her through New Hampshire, placated occasionally with bags of candy. She has made it clear that her own experiences of motherhood have informed her fight for a paid-family-leave program and a bill aimed to combat rising maternal-mortality rates. Gillibrand has also used maternal rhetoric to explain her 2017 call for her colleague Al Franken to resign in response to allegations of groping. “As a mother, I had to be really clear,” she said at a recent town hall. “It is not okay for anyone to grope a woman anywhere on her body without her consent; it is not okay to forcibly kiss a woman, ever, without her consent. It was not okay for Senator Franken, and it is not okay for you, Theo. Ever.” This is a deft and fairly radical deployment of how motherhood — and especially white middle class motherhood — is often deployed in conversations around harassment and assault. Instead of presenting herself as the defender of sons against imagined false charges, Gillibrand has publicly positioned herself, and her own sons, as models of the need to teach men responsibility to be better. Sarah Palin, who accepted the invitation to join John McCain’s ticket when her son Trig was less than a year old — and became the first woman on a major-party ticket to have young children — used her “mama grizzly” image to present herself as tough and practical, but this was done in support of traditional power structures; it did not threaten them.
Of course you don’t have to be a parent at all to advocate for policy that would help other parents. Shirley Chisholm shaped her congressional career around the fight for WIC benefits and subsidized day care, yet she did not have her own children. Neither does the woman drawing on Chisholm’s 1972 presidential candidacy as inspiration, California senator Kamala Harris.
Harris, like Chisholm, is black, and thus her relationship to traditional valuation of motherhood is more fraught. Black women have rarely been celebrated politically as maternal ideals. Before Michelle Obama became mom-in-chief, black mothers most often turned up in a presidential context as emblems of bad parenting, deployed as “welfare queens” and pathologized as unfit single mothers in fights to reduce government programs. Were she a mother, Harris would surely be judged on an even more unforgiving scale.
Harris’s childlessness (and that of another 2020 candidate, Tulsi Gabbard) puts her squarely within a long tradition of women in politics, including Chisholm, Margaret Chase Smith, and Elizabeth Dole, all of whom ran for president before 2008. Childlessness, and often single or widowed status, meant there was no perception of conflict, no domestic responsibility a female politician would be shirking in her rise. But when women powerful enough to be taken seriously for president must also hit some vague mark of “likability,” the risk of being cast as chilly and striving is real. Harris takes pains to mention that her stepchildren call her “Momala”; her Twitter bioreads, “U.S. Senator and candidate for president. Wife, Momala, Auntie.”
Because fatherhood hasn’t been a structural impediment in the way motherhood has, the proportion of childless male presidential candidates has been statistically less significant; neither Cory Booker nor Pete Buttigieg gets asked much about the fact that he doesn’t have children and how that’s shaped his view of the world. Buttigieg, in fact, often positions himself as childlike in wondering what the world will look like in 35 years, when he’s Trump’s age.
Which brings us back to O’Rourke and the blowback he’s received, because, perhaps for the first time in presidential politics, a man did get called out in national publications for his comments about “helping” to raise his own children. He seems to have considered this and, after a few days out on the trail, announced that he’d stop making that joke. “Not only will I not say that again,” he vowed, “but I’ll be more thoughtful going forward in the way that I talk about our marriage and also the way in which I acknowledge the truth of the criticism that I have enjoyed white privilege,” here making reference to the fact that he never faced serious consequences after having been arrested twice as a young man.
That’s all good and true, but O’Rourke has gotten to the cruelest truth about the many advantages that gender and race have bestowed on men like him: Those privileges aren’t really about fatherhood; they are about childhood.
White men — in life, on streets, in cop cars, within their families, on the pages of magazines, and in politics — are permitted to fuck up, to gain our sympathy and protection. They are offered the possibilities of blamelessness, selfishness, naïveté, and second and third chances. They are offered the benefits of youth itself, no matter their age. It doesn’t matter whether they have kids or how they raise kids; these men who want to lead us get to bekids.
*A version of this article appears in the April 15, 2019, issue of New York Magazine. Subscribe Now!
Rebecca Traister



Apr. 14, 2019
Biden’s Plan: All Aboard the Obama Nostalgia Train

Joe Biden, the current Democratic primary front-runner according to most polls, is well aware of the Obama bubble: the phenomenon of party voters favoring the former vice-president because of his association with one of the most popular Democratic leaders in recent history. He’s so aware, in fact, that according to a report from the Associated Press, the nascent Biden campaign intends to lean heavily on Obama’s legacy in an attempt to rebuild the coalition that brought him two sturdy Electoral College wins.
It’s more or less the expected move from the former vice-president, invoking the name of a highly popular centrist in a time when policy proposals from 2020 contenders like Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders are pushing the Party to the left. According to a recent Pew survey of registered Democrats, 53 percent said they want the party to pursue a “more moderate direction,” while 40 percent preferred the more liberal politics that emerged in the wake of the 2016 election.
More numbers in Biden’s favor come from a recent Morning Consult poll, which states he’s the second choice of Bernie Sanders supporters, Kamala Harris supporters, and Beto O’Rourke supporters, suggesting the broad, if secondary appeal of the former vice-president. Perhaps the best argument for a Biden ticket is the possibility of reclaiming working-class Obama-Trump voters for the Democratic Party. According to a Harvard-Harris poll from February, three out of four voters who said they’d back a Biden run don’t have a college education. The same poll states he’s winning 42 percent of non-college-educated voters, 20 points more than his closest competitor, Bernie Sanders.
At a recent labor union event, Biden said he was proud to be an “Obama-Biden Democrat,” close branding that might be essential in the primary battle, where politicians will hit the former VP for both past policies and recent indiscretions. Already, Biden’s opponents are reminding voters of political stances and events — like the the crime bill and Anita Hill hearings — that could haunt him in the primary and beyond. Though Democrats like Bernie Sanders and Nancy Pelosi say Biden’s touchy behavior is not “disqualifying,” it’s still baggage that could weigh down his candidacy. (Consider the president’s bizarre tweet on the matter that ignores his own history with unwanted contact.) Allegations of Biden’s inappropriate contact have yet to hurt his stance in the polls: 71 percent of California Democrats recently polled felt that Biden’s handsiness was not a “serious issue.”
The ex-veep may pull out the “Obama-Biden Democrat” calling card more frequently in the coming weeks, which is a bit odd, as the Associated Press notes. A while back, Obama and Biden reportedly agreed that the former president wouldn’t skew the odds by backing a primary candidate. Thus, the “Obama-Biden Democrat” claim doesn’t have the full support of its most important player.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 14, 2019
Sarah Sanders: Democrats Aren’t ‘Smart Enough’ to Understand Trump’s Tax Returns

White House press secretary Sarah Sanders made a bold claim on Sunday morning in response to House Democrats’ efforts to obtain President Trump’s tax returns. Asked about the issue on Fox News Sunday by host Chris Wallace, Sanders responded that she did not trust Congress, “and frankly, Chris, I don’t think Congress, particularly this group of congressmen and women, are smart enough to look through the thousands of pages that I would assume President Trump’s taxes will be.” She then went on to suggest that people who have accountants can’t understand other people’s taxes, let alone the financial dealings of a self-branded megasuccess like Donald J. Trump.
“My guess is most of them don’t do their own taxes, and I certainly don’t trust them to look through the decades of success the president’s had and determine anything.”
It’s not yet clear what purpose Sanders’s guessing game and lawmaker-intelligence assessment was intended to serve. She called the endeavor “a dangerous, dangerous road” and championed the protection of Trump’s privacy, yet also leaned back on his absurd ongoing claim that his tax returns remain in some perpetual state of audit, and that’s why he continues to be the only president in decades to hide his taxes from the American public (but who would totally share them if he could).
On Saturday, House Ways and Means Committee chairman Richard Neal instructed the IRS to turn over six years of Trump’s tax returns by April 23. That came after the Treasury Department let an April 10 deadline to produce the returns come and go last week, but either way it’s just another volley in what is expected to be a long and complicated legal fight — assuming Representative Neal and his colleagues are smart enough to understand how government and the rule of law work.
Chas Danner



Apr. 14, 2019
Pelosi Requests More Security for Ilhan Omar Following Trump’s 9/11 Attack

Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi said on Sunday that she believes President Trump’s recent Twitter attack on Representative Ilhan Omar has created “real danger” for the freshman congresswoman, and has asked Capitol Police to conduct a security assessment to “safeguard” Omar, her family, and her staff.
On Friday, President Trump tweeted a video featuring news footage of the World Trade Center and Pentagon being attacked on 9/11 to target Omar, one of the first two Muslim women to serve in Congress, including the message “WE WILL NEVER FORGET!” The Islamophobic tweet and video, which sought to sow outrage over comments Omar made last month highlighting the Islamophobia which followed 9/11, then remained pinned to the top of Trump’s Twitter feed through Saturday.
Pelosi was one of many Democrats, including all of the major candidates for president, to decry Trump’s tweet over the weekend and conclude that the attack could lead to real harm being done to Omar by one of Trump’s supporters. “The President’s words weigh a ton, and his hateful and inflammatory rhetoric creates real danger,” Pelosi said in a statement. “President Trump must take down his disrespectful and dangerous video.”
Omar, the first woman to wear a hijab in Congress, has faced regular death threats since taking office, particularly since her faith, outspoken politics, and controversial criticism of Israel’s U.S. lobbying efforts have made her a popular target on the American right. In a few instances, Omar has used language mirroring anti-Semitic tropes to attack Israel’s influence on U.S. lawmakers, and it has triggered bipartisan criticism, as well as a wave of cynical outrage from Planet Trump. Omar has also been repeated called “un-American” by conservative pundits, resurfacing a well-worn anti-Muslim trope that became popular in the aftermath of 9/11.
The focus of Trump’s tweeted video, however, was part of a speech Omar gave at the Council on American-Islamic Relations in March in which she attempted to differentiate the Islamist terrorists who carried out the 9/11 attacks — an extremist minority — from the Muslim Americans who were unfairly subjected to Islamophobia as a result.
“CAIR was founded after 9/11 because they recognized that some people did something and that all of us were starting to lose access to our civil liberties,” Omar said, deliberately omitting the terrorist’s extremist faith in the context of what happened next. Right-wing attacks later focused, predictably, on the “some people did something” part, disingenuously framing the fragment of Omar’s comments as some kind of minimization of the attacks or a denial of the hijackers’ motives. It was, in other words, perfect fodder to resurrect the simple-minded Islamophobia she was criticizing, and President Trump and many of his allies didn’t miss the opportunity — particularly after Omar recently (and correctly) called chief White House xenophobe Stephen Miller a white nationalist.
On Thursday, the New York Post shamelessly devoted its front page to the overblown story, printing an image of the towers of the World Trade Center burning next to the headline, “Here’s Your Something.” The issue prompted the Yemeni American Merchants Association — which represents more than 4,000 New York City bodega owners and was founded in response to President Trump’s Islamophobic travel ban targeting Muslims — to call for a boycott of the Post, noting in a statement that “[the Post’s] rhetoric threatens the safety and wellbeing of Omar, Muslim leaders, and the larger Muslim American community at a time when Islamophobia is at an all-time high.”
Trump’s attack on Omar was a “good thing,” according to White House press secretary Sarah Sanders. During a Sunday morning appearance on ABC’s This Week, Sanders claimed the president “is wishing no ill will and certainly not violence towards anyone,” but she also tried to further hype Omar’s characterization of the 9/11 hijackers as well as link it to the representative’s unrelated remarks about Israel. “I think it is a good thing that the president is calling her out for those comments,” Sanders suggested.
When Sanders appeared on Fox News Sunday, host Chris Wallace made a point of saying the show was not “comfortable” playing the whole misleading video, and then asked why the president was “comfortable putting out horrible images like that,” and “does he worry at all about inciting violence against Muslims in general or Ilhan Omar in specific?”
“Nothing could be further from the truth,” Sanders replied, insisting that the president — who has lied about Muslims in New Jersey celebrating 9/11 and praised the idea of coating the armed forces’ bullets in pig’s blood — isn’t trying to incite violence against Muslims, but is “actually speaking out against it.”
Chas Danner



Apr. 14, 2019
Pete Buttigieg Announces Presidential Campaign

Pete Buttigieg, the mayor of South Bend, Indiana, is officially running for president. On Sunday, forced inside by an unseasonably cold rain, the small-city mayor and unlikely presidential contender announced his campaign in an auto-assembly plant refurbished as a mixed-use tech center.
“It’s time to walk away from the politics of the past, and toward something totally different,” Buttigieg said to the hometown crowd. “So that’s why I’m here today, joining you to make a little news. My name is Pete Buttigieg. They call me Mayor Pete. I am a proud son of South Bend, Indiana. And I am running for president of the United States.”
The first openly gay Democratic candidate for president, Buttigieg is enjoying an unexpected, if early, swing of momentum in his favor. Recent surveys of Democrats in key primary states like Iowa, New Hampshire, and South Carolina show Buttigieg in third place behind Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden, who’s yet to officially announce. Buttigieg is holding his own financially as well, with a first-quarter $7 million that makes him fourth among Democrats who have announced fundraising numbers. “Candidly, I don’t even know all the reasons why this is going so well,” Buttigieg told New York’s Olivia Nuzzi for a cover profile in the latest issue of the magazine.
Of course, there are still 15 grueling months before the July 2020 Democratic National Convention in Milwaukee, held three hours northwest of South Bend. The most glaring obstacle to Mayor Pete’s becoming the youngest-ever major-party presidential candidate lies right there in his nickname: There’s never been a candidate to hop straight from a mayor’s office to the White House, let alone an official from a Rust Belt town of 102,245. Plus some residents of South Bend are disappointed in Buttigieg’s town-revival efforts, arguing that they prioritize white and wealthy neighborhoods at the expense of people of color and the poor. Over a quarter of the town’s population lives at or below the poverty line, nine points higher than the national average.
But on Sunday, the hometown crowd was roaring for its mayor. In a speech with heavy use of the third person and a certain four-letter H-word associated with the last Democratic president, Buttigieg stressed a sense of revival. “It’s cold out, but we’ve had it with winter,” he said. “You and I have the chance to usher in a new American spring. So with hope in our hearts and fire in our bellies, let’s get to work and make history.” With that, he walked out to the soundtrack of Creedence Clearwater Revival’s “Up and Around the Bend.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 14, 2019
The 10 Worst Presidential-Nomination Campaigns in Living Memory

As we barrel toward the next season of presidential primaries and caucuses (on the Democratic side, at least), it’s normal to think about the successful campaigns of the past that set a template for today’s POTUS wannabes. Some classics are easy on the memory, like come-from-nowhere nomination winners George McGovern in 1972, Jimmy Carter in 1976, and, yes, Donald Trump in 2016, as are strategic masterpieces as Barack Obama’s campaign and John McCain’s back-from-the-dead effort in 2008.
But with what will ultimately be dozens of candidates running for the next Democratic nomination, there will be a lot of losers who follow very different precedents — the types of campaigns that begin preposterously or proceed disastrously and end in the sad silence of nobody caring enough to witness the good-bye. So it’s a good time to remember the really bad nomination campaigns in both parties over the decades and consider the lessons each might offer the campaign class of 2020.
This list excludes the multitude of obscure candidates who never raised enough hopes to be worthy of being dashed but includes themes of failure that have repeated across more than one cycle, as well as 2020 takeaways where appropriate. (And please note that even bad campaigns can involve talented, hard-working people who sometimes go on to successful political careers.)
Both of these candidates were on-paper heavyweights thought to be exceptionally well positioned to win the nomination or at least seriously contend. Both were from states bordering Iowa. Both had serious conservative Evangelical street cred and estimable (from a conservative point of view) records as governors. And unfortunately for them, both had charisma deficits.
Tim “T-Paw” Pawlenty staked everything on winning the August 2011 Ames straw poll, then the key pre-caucus test of strength in Iowa. He finished third, well behind fellow Minnesotan Michele Bachmann, and with his money depleted, he almost immediately dropped out. Scott Walker’s campaign also foundered early, as CNN reported in September 2015:
When he withdrew, Walker called on conservatives to quickly winnow the large 2016 field so “that the voters can focus on a limited number of candidates who can offer a positive, conservative alternative to the current front-runner,” Donald Trump. That didn’t work, either.
Both Pawlenty and Walker lost gubernatorial races in 2018.
To some extent, all capsized campaigns can be blamed on the mistakes of their captains. But sometimes candidates self-immolate with breathtaking speed and irreversible damage. The classic of this genre was provided by Democratic candidate Gary Hart in 1987. Hart entered the 1988 cycle as a clear front-runner after nearly upsetting Walter Mondale in the 1984 primaries. He then quickly self-destructed, answering questions about long-rumored womanizing by issuing a “follow me around” taunt to reporters — which led directly to the exposure of a dalliance with a young former beauty queen named Donna Rice, including photos of Rice sitting on his lap aboard a lobbyist-piloted yacht appropriately named Monkey Business. Hart was forced from the race almost instantly, though he did reenter the field later as a forlorn, substance-focused debate contender with no real prospects.
Former Texas governor Rick Perry took longer to blow himself up. He entered the 2012 contest late but initially looked like a king-hell fireball, dispensing red meat to thrilled conservative audiences and racing to a lead in the polls. Then the debates arrived, and in one Perry stubbornly refused to follow Mitt Romney in attacking generous treatment of Dreamers, and in another turned into Bobo the Simple-Minded, unable to remember which federal agencies he had proposed to eliminate. He hung around, bleeding support, and soon after a fifth-place finish in Iowa, dropped out.
Other candidates have inexplicably damaged themselves in less-enduring ways. One good example is Democrat Ted Kennedy, who on the eve of his challenge to incumbent Jimmy Carter in 1980 granted an interview to CBS’s Roger Mudd in which he was shockingly incoherent, creating doubts about his once-indomitable political strength. Another is Republican George Romney, whose 1968 nomination campaign lost steam and expired after he attributed an abandoned position on the Vietnam War to a “brainwashing” he had received from military brass. Eugene McCarthy, alluding to Romney’s reputation as not terribly deep, supposedly quipped, “I would have thought a light rinse would have sufficed.”
There’s no telling which 2020 candidate might be susceptible to self-sabotage; by definition, it can strike candidates from a clear blue sky.
Battening on the name ID he built as Democratic vice-presidential nominee in 2000, Joe Lieberman led the 2004 field in the polls for some time. But being crosswise with Democratic activists over his robust and unrepentant support for the Iraq War, Lieberman skipped Iowa and then became an object of enduring ridicule for trying to spin a fifth-place finish in New Hampshire as a sign of “Joementum.” He dropped out of the race a week later and, in the next presidential cycle, backed Republican John McCain.
Other candidates who looked solid until voters started voting and then quickly lost ground include Democrat Ed Muskie in 1972 and Republican Rudy Giuliani in 2008.
The 2020 candidate who might be susceptible to this malady, if only because his early polling is more robust than his record might suggest, is Joe Biden. He should definitely avoid claiming “Joementum.”
Quayle could fit into any number of categories of campaign-trail failure, and for that reason he deserves his own slot on the list. He was elected vice-president in 1988 after a campaign in which he was thoroughly humiliated by Democratic counterpart Lloyd Bentsen in a debate. His reputation as something of a lightweight was burnished by his most-high-profile moment as vice-president: a quarrel with fictional sit-com character Murphy Brown over her decision to give birth to a child out of wedlock (a decision that could have just as easily been reconciled with Quayle’s pro-life point of view).
His presidential campaign in the 2000 cycle went nowhere fast despite high name ID, mainly because of the persistently low regard in which he was held by voters, as Gallup’s Frank Newport explained later:
The former veep finished eighth in the 1999 Ames straw poll, trailing such political powerhouses as Alan Keyes, and soon dropped out.
There is a former veep in the field in 2020, but even among detractors, Joe Biden has inspired much more respect, and commanded much more popularity, than Quayle could ever muster. His top-ten standing is pretty safe.
One of the recurring incidents of tragicomedy in presidential primaries is when puffed-up potentates of Beltway politics get confused and assume their titanic qualities will translate well in a national campaign. Representative Wilbur Mills of Arkansas was a much-revered figure in Washington as longtime chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, where, as the New York Times put it, he was “held in awe for his near-absolute sway over any legislation with fiscal consequences.” He let himself get flattered into a 1972 presidential candidacy, but after finishing a poor fourth among five candidates in New Hampshire (trailing even eccentric L.A. mayor Sam Yorty), Mills disappeared from the campaign trail. A couple of years later, Mills’s fall from grace culminated in an early-morning incident when he was found in the company of a stripper named Fanne Fox, who tried to flee the scene by jumping into Washington’s Tidal Basin.
Phil Gramm was a Texas Democrat turned Republican senator who became a big deal in conservative circles during the Reagan, Bush 41, and early Clinton years. As RealClearPolitics explains in its own list of terrible candidates, Gramm got off to a roaring start with fundraising in the ’96 cycle but never got rolling with voters:
Perhaps Texas breeds pols who are too big for their britches, since Gramm’s underwhelming, but well-financed, performance was matched by Democratic senator Lloyd Bentsen in 1976 (though Bentsen did serve credibly 12 years later as Michael Dukakis’s running mate) and by fellow party-switcher John Connally, the former governor and Nixon favorite who bombed in 1980.
There’s nobody quite like Mills or Gramm or Connally or Bentsen in the 2020 Democratic field, though you can argue the bumper crop of congressional candidates (six senators and four House members and counting) shows some Beltway self-regard in itself.
Nelson Rockefeller had a distinguished early career in Latin American diplomacy and philanthropy and an impressive list of accomplishments as governor of New York over 13 consecutive years in that post. But his intense desire to become president was consistently frustrated. He briefly ran in 1960 before withdrawing in Richard Nixon’s favor, though not until he extorted platform concessions from the winner that permanently alienated outgoing president Dwight D. Eisenhower. Rocky was the front-runner for 1964 until his sudden divorce and remarriage damaged his personal standing significantly. He ran anyway, and after a crucial primary loss to Barry Goldwater in California (helped along by ill-timed news that his second wife had given birth), suffered an ignominious reception at that year’s Republican convention, when Goldwater delegates howled down his efforts to speak. In 1968, he decided not to challenge Nixon again but then changed his mind and jumped back into the race, with his sole message being his superior electability — which was ruined on the eve of the convention by a poll showing Nixon doing better against Democrat Hubert Humphrey.
Rocky was considering yet another presidential run in 1973 when he was appointed Gerald Ford’s vice-president. His political career ended when he was forced off the 1976 ticket by conservatives threatening to bolt to Ronald Reagan.
You have to go back to Robert Taft (’40, ’48, and ’52) to find Rockefeller’s equal as a three-time nomination-contest loser (not counting perennial candidates like Harold Stasson, or favorite sons). However, there have been many two-time losers who (unlike, say, Ronald Reagan) didn’t make up for it with a win or two along the way. There are Democrats Estes Kefauver (’52 and ’56), George Wallace (’64 and ’72), Gene McCarthy (’68 and ’72), Scoop Jackson (’72 and ’76), and John Edwards (’04 and ’08). Republicans include Lamar Alexander (’96 and ’00) and the aforementioned Rick Perry (’12 and ’16).
The only 2020 candidate in danger of becoming a three-time loser is Joe Biden (’88 and ’08). If he wins, he’d match Hubert Humphrey (’60, ’68, ’72) with a one-and-two record in nominating contests.
Again, this is a subjective process, but it’s hard to think of a presidential candidate whose underachievement was so overwhelming and had such enormous consequences for his party and country. Jeb Bush entered the 2016 contest with the most valuable last name in politics, a massive fundraising machine, a boatload of elected official endorsements, strong positioning in the field ideologically, and a critical firewall state relatively early in the process (his home state of Florida). He was overwhelmingly the smart-money favorite, sure at least to survive until the late primaries.
Instead, he became a punching bag for Donald Trump in the debates and a steadily unpopular candidate in polls. And he wasted an enormous amount of his donors’ money as he stumbled toward defeat, as I noted at the time:
Bush withdrew from the race before having to suffer the ultimate humiliation of being trounced by Donald Trump in Florida (that distinction was saved for fellow Floridian Marco Rubio). He ultimately earned a total of three delegates, which means he and his outside backers spent $53 million per delegate. The enduring epithet for Jeb’s candidacy was this incident in New Hampshire:
But there were so many such incidents that soon after he withdrew, Vox published an article titled “The 17 saddest moments of Jeb Bush’s very sad campaign.”
The main reason I listed Jeb! 2016 as the worst nomination-contest campaign is that I can’t imagine anyone matching this disaster in 2020 or in the foreseeable future. That it helped Donald Trump ascend to the presidency is the rancid cherry on top of the sundae.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 14, 2019
Enes Kanter Is the Man in the Middle

It’s been a long season for Enes Kanter, one that began in a Knicks jersey and today has him in Portland red, but the friendly giant looks relaxed winding down a recent practice with his new team. He’s blending in, launching jumpers, playing the part of an NBA player, which is really all he set out to be.
Yet he knows that blending in is a privilege he loses as soon as he is done shooting. For the past three years, Kanter has waged a media campaign against the president of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, for the dismantling of human rights in his home country. Hardly a week has passed without him appearing on cable news or in the press, hardly a practice without a reporter prompting Kanter to recite the record of Erdoğan’s oppression. His efforts to enter Turkey’s crisis into the American mainstream have been an astonishing success. But the endeavor has also cost him. His seventh season has been the first in which the specter of the Erdoğan threat has compromised his work on the court.
This was the first year, in other words, that Kanter missed a game out of concern he would be killed — assassinated by Erdoğan’s goons or rogue loyalists — if he set foot outside the United States. Turkish courts convicted him in absentia of terrorism in 2017; in advance of the Knicks’ trip to London this past January, the country reportedly issued a warrant with Interpol for his arrest. For that game, as well as one against the Toronto Raptors, Kanter stayed in New York.
So, after an occasionally moody stint in New York ended with the last-place Knicks buying out his contract, the brawny seven-footer latched onto the Blazers, a team hurtling toward the postseason with a void at center. (Jusuf Nurkic, who had been a force on the interior, broke his leg in late March.) He’s absorbed in the work of fitting in, learning new schemes and new teammates on the fly, removed from the media spotlight and playing meaningful ball again.
“We were thinking about like, if we can get a win or not in New York,” he says after shootaround. “Here we’re like, let’s get in the playoffs. All you think about is get to the playoffs.”
The playoff push has allowed Kanter to sideline at least some of his off-court stress. He’s fit in with the Blazers roster, a loose bunch he called high-character. But the stress continues to mount anyway: his father, who still lives in Istanbul, will soon be going on trial, and that’s weighing on him, too.
“What he’s facing is being my dad,” he says. “Of course it’s always in my head. It’s tough to play basketball and think about, My dad might be in jail for 15 years.”
Long loath to betray the gravity of his protest, Kanter’s eternal sunshine has finally caught a few clouds. He sighs.
In the U.S., Kanter is a lovable galoot, a journeyman center with a penchant for post play and offensive rebounding, known for playful smack talk and fawning teammate PDA. To many in his home country, however, Kanter is part of a conspiracy to overthrow Turkish democracy. Erdoğan claims that Fethullah Gülen, the founder of an Islamic movement called the Hizmet, ordered a coup attempt in 2016 that sent the country into a tailspin. Gülen’s influence has loomed over Turkish civic life for decades, and Kanter, an avowed disciple, visits him regularly at his Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania, compound. Though Gülen and Kanter have both condemned the coup attempt, it’s their word against the president’s in a country without a free press.
In threatening the freedom of Mehmet Kanter, a genetics professor and Kanter’s father, Erdoğan deigns to bully his most broadly influential critic into silence. Under a national state of emergency that lasted two years, Erdoğan jailed and/or fired well over 100,000 people suspected of Gülen affiliation on the charge of membership in a terrorist organization — the same charge levied against Kanter and now his father. Erdoğan also closed hundreds of Gülen-affiliated schools across the country and shut down several Hizmet-sympathetic media outlets. Under his watch, Turkey has become the world’s leading jailer of journalists; meanwhile, its president has used the American media to lobby for Gülen’s extradition.
Still, Kanter’s is the rare cause with bipartisan support in Washington; when he visits the Capitol, as he does periodically, he’s as likely to take a meeting with Marco Rubio as he is with Ron Wyden. With rhetorical savvy and millennial sangfroid, the 26-year-old has both held the media’s eye on Erdoğan and managed to shape American public opinion in the process. It has him toying with the idea of a future in politics once his playing days are over. “I actually started to think about it,” he says, brightening. “Because, I mean, if there is no good there, there’s bad. I would love to, because all this situation and everything, I know most of this stuff!”
Where Kanter’s found the least support in the basketball community has been from his countrymen. Hedo Türkoğlu, a retired NBA foot soldier and current president of the Turkish Basketball Federation, reiterated in a recent interview with ESPN that Kanter was “openly supporting a terrorist leader.” Türkoğlu has advised Erdoğan in an official capacity since before the coup, but he is not alone in his suspicion of Kanter. The four other active Turkish NBA players snub him, too.
It couldn’t have been Gülen who put the coup attempt in motion, Kanter tells me, because he was scrolling his iPad at Gülen’s compound in the Poconos when the news broke. Yes, he was there, in the room, with a central character of the night that changed the course of modern Turkish history. Kanter says all Gülen did that night was sit and pray.
For Kanter, being there was nothing out of the ordinary — he’s there all the time. It’s how the Trail Blazers’ starting center got to be there all the time that takes a bit longer to explain. He would not have even been in touch with Gülen — and thus may never have become a human-rights crusader and outlaw — were it not for a fateful injury that saved his NBA career and turned his life around.
Raised in Istanbul and in the smaller lakeside town of Van, Kanter attended Gülen-affiliated schools in Turkey up to his senior year of high school, when he moved to the U.S. with the intent to play Division I basketball. He first met Gülen around that time — Gülen has been on the lam in Pennsylvania since 1999 — and the movement set him up with a translator who later became his agent. When the Utah Jazz drafted Kanter in 2011, the Hizmet exulted at landing a player at professional basketball’s highest level.
But Kanter’s off-court exploits during his first two NBA seasons pushed the Gülenists away. He was adored in Salt Lake City, but less for his play than for harmless juvenile high jinks like icing a sprained ankle in a bucket of soggy popcorn. He tweeted open invitations for a blonde woman to give him a massage, then for a brunette to join him at Cheesecake Factory. He posted a picture with Playboy bunnies at Hugh Hefner’s mansion on his Instagram. He was making a common mistake among NBA cherubs — trying to keep up with his older teammates in an effort to fit in. There wasn’t a formal falling out with the Hizmet, Kanter says, but he knew what he was doing: his own thing.
The gruesome shoulder dislocation in early 2013 — a seven-foot-three opposing player dove on top of him going for a loose ball, kneading Kanter’s shoulder into the hardwood; Kanter stood up with his arm bulging out of its socket — cut short his second season but made possible a reckoning. During Kanter’s post-surgical overnight at Northwestern, a stranger knocked on his door bearing a bouquet.
The visitor — the head of Chicago’s Turkish cultural center, and a Gülen devotee — arrived at a moment when Kanter had already turned against the national team, deciding he wanted to steer clear of Turkish people altogether. The visit was short: He basically dropped off the flowers and left. But Kanter took to him. “I thought, not all Turkish people are bad!” Kanter said. Other Hizmet members rolled through during his recovery, taking Kanter out for Turkish pizza and keeping him company at his hotel. By fall of that year, Kanter was back in the religious fold, tweeting his first potshots at Erdoğan and getting himself booted from the national team for good.
Kanter has forfeited the endorsements, shoe deals, commercials — all the accoutrements of NBA stardom available to players who don’t step out of line. His jersey is banned in Turkey. If he had never known the Hizmet, “I’d be two or three times richer than I am now,” he says.
To this day, Kanter doesn’t know how the emissary learned his location. But the come-to-Gülen moment put him on a happier trajectory. “After my second year in the NBA, my prep years, my college, I hadn’t really found myself,” he said. “What am I doing, just playing basketball? It was eating at me. Because basketball, you play, you retire, you’re done. I wanted to do something more.” To Kanter, the Hizmet is about finding common ground, promoting peace and education; it has also, undeniably, put him on the path to the alienation he faces today.
Even with friends in sports, the press corps, even Congress, Kanter’s is a lonely defiance, a solo crusade, and one that would not quit him even if he tried to let it go. Besieged by death threats on social media, he never goes anywhere by himself, a paranoia only reinforced by the constant presence of his manager or a bodyguard. Attempts to contact his family could endanger all parties involved. The only time he’s by himself, he says, is when he goes to the bathroom.
“It’s a sacrifice, man,” he says. “I’m 26 years old, I’m not some 43-year-old who’s just gonna watch TV all day. Of course I want to go out there, hang out with teammates, hang out with people I love, go to the beach, go hang out! But then I’m thinking about all the people getting tortured in jail. I’m like, I cannot do that.
“I actually tried. My teammate said take a vacation. Go to Hawaii, L.A., just be away from all the drama for just a couple days. So I went to L.A. in the summer. The second day I’m like, what am I doing? I can’t do this. Because all my friends, my family, my neighbors, are suffering in jail. I cannot just come here and get tan, and go to the beach and hang out. So it’s tough — I wanna do all that stuff, but it’s not right. I gotta finish what I started.”
Basketball remains his last refuge from the turmoil, and it will last as long as the Blazers do this postseason. “The only time I have fun is when I’m on the court.” Kanter sighs. “But you only play 48 minutes, and as soon as you leave the gym, all the drama starts again. It’s a sacrifice. I don’t know how long it’s gonna take — one year, ten years, 15 years — but I cannot stop right now.”
Louis Keene



Apr. 14, 2019
Wonder Boy
Pete Buttigieg is a gay Harvard alum, fluent in Gramsci, Joyce, and Norwegian. And he’s the Democrats’ folksiest heartland hope. Really!
By the time Pete Buttigieg arrived at the Currier Museum of Art in Manchester, New Hampshire, on the night of April 5, the space was at capacity and the crowd had swelled to fill half the parking lot. It was drizzling, but word quickly spread that Buttigieg would speak before heading inside, so those denied admission stayed put, preparing to lift up their phones to document this moment in the twilight, when the suddenly famous mayor of a small city in a state they’d probably only ever visit by accident or under force would make the case for his campaign to be the savior who delivers America from President Donald Trump.
The mayor of South Bend, Indiana (pop. 102,245), for the past eight years and a candidate in the 2020 Democratic primary (pop. 18 and expanding) since January, Buttigieg is in the middle of what the mainstream media likes to call “a moment,” that dreamy season between obscurity and overexposure when all anyone asks is “Who is Pete Buttigieg?” or “How do you pronounce Buttigieg?” or “Should I care about Pete Buttigieg?” Which is mostly a way of asking, “Is this for real?”
“Candidly, I don’t even know all the reasons why this is going so well,” Buttigieg told me, and (candidly) I don’t quite believe him. But somehow it is, and Buttigieg (BOOT-edge-edge) is now running alongside or out in front of just about everybody except for Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders, the candidates whose names are most familiar to voters. In a New Hampshire poll released on April 10, he placed third, as he did in an Iowa poll from March 24. A few one-off polls a year before a primary might not mean anything, of course. There’s a possibility that Buttigieg is to the 2020 Democratic primary what Jon Huntsman was to 2012’s Republican one. But as we now know [gestures broadly] way crazier things have happened than a candidate maintaining his or her unexpected popularity all the way through to the conventions, and Buttigieg’s campaign has benefited from more than a month of fawning from media elites and genuinely impressive fund-raising numbers — it raised more than $7 million in the first quarter, the campaign says, which was apparently much more than those inside the campaign were expecting or knew exactly what to do with.
“I think everything about this is as improbable as it is well aligned,” Buttigieg told me. “There’s that line about me being a laboratory concoction of what a politician might be. I get where that comes from, but then again, in what laboratory would you have cooked up as your entry in a presidential contest ‘mid-size-city midwestern mayor who’s not even 40 yet,’ you know?” He’s 37, and it doesn’t take much imagination to see why a skeptic might assess what’s on offer here and come away in disbelief that a single, organically grown person prone to consultantspeak could check so many boxes relevant to this moment, including, I guess, those for the always advantageous political qualities of “false modesty” and the “ability to be all things to all people.”
Sick of old people? He looks like Alex P. Keaton. Scared of young people? He looks like Alex P. Keaton. Religious? He’s a Christian. Atheist? He’s not weird about it. Wary of Washington? He’s from flyover country. Horrified by flyover country? He has degrees from Harvard and Oxford. Make the President Read Again? He learned Norwegian to read Erlend Loe. Traditional? He’s married. Woke? He’s gay. Way behind the rest of the country on that? He’s not too gay. Worried about socialism? He’s a technocratic capitalist. Worried about technocratic capitalists? He’s got a whole theory about how our system of “democratic capitalism” has to be a whole lot more “democratic.” If you squint hard enough to not see color, some people say, you can almost see Obama the inspiring professor. Oh, and he’s the son of an immigrant, a Navy vet, speaks seven foreign languages (in addition to Norwegian, Arabic, Spanish, Maltese, Dari, French, and Italian), owns two rescue dogs, and plays the goddamn piano. He’s actually terrifying. What mother wouldn’t love this guy?
When I asked him if he was drawn to politics early on, the type of child who was president for Halloween, he said, “I think I actually did dress up as a politician once on Halloween.” He tried to move on, talking about his boyhood dream of being a pilot. But wait — which politician was it, I asked? “It was just a politician in general,” he said. “I remember I made, like, a little — for whatever reason, I noticed the little microphones, the little mics that politicians wear, and I, like, made a little one of those out of paper and clipped it to myself and wore a little suit.”
Outside in Manchester, I couldn’t even see him at first, when the crowd, a dense mass of white people wearing Patagonia, suddenly swarmed to the right. There was cheering and chanting, then finally his recently identifiable face sprouting on the stalk of his five-foot-nine-inch frame from amid the forest of iPhones and cameras and mics. “I heard the way you ingratiate yourself to voters is to stand on things, so I found this park bench here,” he said.
This was a joke at the expense of Beto O’Rourke, another candidate in the Democratic primary who has earned some notoriety for his Tom Cruisian habit of perching himself on surfaces not ordinarily designated for such activity. And it killed — a reflection of Buttigieg’s deft delivery, sure, but also of his audience.
Mayor Pete, as he’s known (though people who seem to really know him, including his husband, call him Peter), was surrounded by adoring or at least very curious people. He began to deliver a short version of his stump speech. By definition, a stump speech is something that gets repeated often. I can unfortunately still clearly recall the portions of Ted Cruz’s speech relating to his dad sewing money into his underwear when he first came to America from Cuba — and the last time I heard it was during the Republican primary that ended three years ago. Politicians also just repeat themselves a lot in general once they decide how they’ll talk about issue X or Y. Life is less complicated and less dangerous that way.
But judging him by this standard, Buttigieg is still unusually controlled. Even his modulations are the same from speech to speech and interview to interview. In most of them, he uses the phrase “theory of the case,” meaning his belief that defeating Trump — and Trumpism — is a job for someone who understands the folks who put him in office well enough to convince them that there’s another way. “I don’t think you can ever have an honest politics that revolves around the word again,” he likes to say, an indirect criticism of the slogan that defines the president’s worldview.
Speaking in Manchester, he asked, “What will America look like in 2054, when I reach the current age of the current president?” It’s a line he employs with “Lock her up!” frequency. He said his campaign “will not only win an election but help us begin to win an era.” And by this he doesn’t mean the same thing Bernie Sanders does by “revolution,” but something much more like what Obama meant by “change.” Even on the trail, he talks a lot more about democratic reforms and the party’s long game than you’d think voters would have any tolerance for, as they stare down what many seem to consider the most important election of their lifetime, and possibly the country’s.
David Axelrod, Obama’s longtime strategist and now Buttigieg’s friend, observed that Buttigieg has something in common not only with Obama but with the two Democratic presidents before him: faith. “His fluency on faith and his willingness to speak about it is an asset,” he said. “Carter, Clinton, and Obama — they all shared that quality. It was one of the cues that opened the door to voters.”
Eric Lesser, now a Massachusetts state senator, is a friend of “Peter’s” from Harvard. He worked on the 2008 campaign and then for Axelrod in the Obama White House. “He reminds me of the very early phases of President Obama,” Lesser said. “Just the fact that he is so deeply thoughtful and intellectual, and also somebody who is relatable.”
Axelrod said there are “two ways” to look at the race: You either “beat Trump at his own game,” and alienate crucial voters in the process, or you “build a bridge for people who may have voted for Trump and who may like some of the things he’s done but are troubled by him.” Buttigieg is uniquely able — and willing — to do this, Axelrod said, because such voters helped get him reelected (with 80 percent of the vote) when Mike Pence — a born-again Christian and zealous opponent of the LGBTQ community — was the governor of Indiana. Buttigieg is often asked how he would defend himself against Trump on the debate stage, or once the insult-comic campaign alter ego logs back on full time. He always says the same thing, that you’ll never be able to beat him with a savage one-liner, that beating him will mean ignoring him, to some degree, so that someone else — and their ideas — can get some oxygen.
But before he gets to present his theory of the case against Trump, he’s got to get through his case against the other Democratic contenders. Or at least that’s how I thought a primary worked. Buttigieg either sees things differently or wants to avoid meaningful bickering at this early stage with his competitors, and so he’s pretending to. “I think the thing about having so many of us in the field is that, for somebody like me, you’re not competing against any individual. You’re competing against the house,” he said. “And it’s possible, in that way, to — I think — run your own plan and talk about your own case and let others figure out for themselves all the ways in which I am simply not like any of the others.” Operationally, the strategy of his campaign seems to be: Pick up enough Democrats who found Trump’s message appealing to actually win in Iowa and New Hampshire, then ride the momentum and publicity (he’ll say yes to any interview; see here, and here) into Super Tuesday. And from there …
“He has an eye for making his brand seem bigger and larger than it is,” one senior Democratic consultant told me. “And eventually, if you fake it enough, that becomes true. Everything he’s projecting makes it look like a real campaign.”
As South Bend goes, so goes the nation, and as soon as Buttigieg was elected mayor, he was talked about as a future presidential hopeful. I’m just kidding.But he did bring with him a technocratic vision for the future of his city, which had decayed over the previous half-century as industry collapsed throughout the Rust Belt. On Election Night, Buttigieg promised “to apply new tools,” address vacant housing, “forge new alliances,” improve the school system, “find every way possible” to deal with crime and violence, and “create a new culture of customer service” to advance the efficiency, transparency, and cost-effectiveness of city services. “We’re going to think bigger about South Bend’s borders,” he said. “We’re going to find new ways to find partnerships — not just across the region but around the world — so that South Bend is truly a global city.”
His own horizon seemed a little more limited. In a place like Indiana, a liberal like Mayor Pete could never win a statewide office. (He tried, once, for state treasurer, and was humiliated.) But maybe he could somehow vault himself into national politics, presenting himself as a moderate voice from the heartland even if all he’d ever won was the mayoralty of a college town. Of course, Buttigieg was still in the closet at that point.
He joined the Navy Reserve before coming out, and before the repeal of “don’t ask, don’t tell.” It was a strange time to be signing up for military service, 2009, when a Democratic president had just won a landslide victory as an antiwar candidate. Buttigieg’s decision, he told me, came from “an awareness that somebody was going to be tasked with those duties, and if it was gonna be somebody, then why wouldn’t it be me?” By the time he was actually deployed, nearly everyone on both sides of the aisle had decided the war was a disaster. During a 2017 interview with his friend and mentor Axelrod, Buttigieg was asked if his decision had been motivated in part by politics. As Axelrod put it, “The cynic would say [it was] a résumé enhancer.” Buttigieg said, “Not really. I mean, it was more of the family tradition. I have reflected on that. The thing I asked myself was, If it was as damaging politically as it is actually helpful politically, would I have still done it? I hope the answer is yes. There’s no way to know. There’s no way to run that experiment, I guess.”
When I asked him to elaborate, he told me, “There are a lot of motivations for service, and the quest for honor has been one of them since antiquity. But something like serving in the military — especially the extent to which it has a real price, and I don’t just mean the risk of coming into harm but the moral cost of becoming involved even peripherally in killing — means it’s not something you do lightly. And it’s not something you do unless you trust your own motivations for doing it.” He added that, while military service is popular now, and “people are tripping over themselves to hug a service member,” that’s not always the case. “You really wanna make sure that you’re making this choice as independently as you can from the question of what other people would think. Because what other people will think is gonna change.”
After he returned in 2015, he made the decision to publicly come out, at the age of 33, five months before voters took to the polls to decide whether to reelect him. “The first time I knew that you could be gay and still be in politics, I guess, was when I became aware of Barney Frank, who’s also just a remarkable mind and a very interesting person to watch,” Buttigieg told me. “I was vaguely aware of Harvey Milk, and have come to understand more and more his significance. But there were not a lot of gay political role models that I could look to, certainly in my own geography, when I was getting started.” He has said that if there had been “a pill” he could have taken to stop being gay, “I would’ve swallowed it before you had time to give me a sip of water,” and that if he could’ve found the part of him that made him gay, he would’ve “cut it out with a knife.” He told me, “It took me a very long time to be ready.” As he struggled for acceptance, he “became involved with some extraordinary women, out of a desire to find whatever part of me might be straight and give it every last shot.”
He started to tell me that story: “When I came out in my late 20s,” he began, before I cut him off: “In your book, you wrote you came out at 33, no?” “Oh, sorry,” he said, “I guess it was 33.” But that was only the last stage in the process, he explained. By his late 20s, as he prepared to lead South Bend, he had already come out to a close friend. “That was something that I knew I should do before taking office as mayor, because I didn’t think that I should have a position of that level of responsibility while something as important in my own self was unresolved.”
In this race, candidates like Biden and Beto have received criticism for their privilege as straight white men. Buttigieg’s homosexuality — which also may confer a fundraising opportunity — has served to insulate him somewhat. But not entirely. Jason Johnson, editor of The Root, said the “mostly white” reporters are “kissing his butt,” and, “looking for a white guy who makes them feel good about themselves.” Buttigieg’s record on race in South Bend, whose residents are 40 percent black and Latino and 25 percent below the poverty level, has come under scrutiny. He was forced to explain why, in 2015, he said that, “all lives matter,” (the phrase, he explained, hadn’t yet been weaponized by the right as a response to the Black Lives Matter movement). And the crowning jewel of his data-driven revitalization initiatives, a project to fix or demolish 1,000 homes that were vacant or not up to code, has been cast by critics as a form of soulless gentrification.
“I want to introduce myself. I work for Smucker’s,” a man said as he approached Chasten and shook his hand. “Really!” Chasten said. “Well, with a name like Smucker’s …” The man stared blankly, prompting Chasten to glance self-consciously at the people around him. “I’m looking around, like, anyone?” he said later. The Smucker’s man told Chasten that the company, which also owns Jif peanut butter, wanted to donate a pallet of it to a shelter on behalf of the campaign, which is not as odd as it may sound — in Pete’s book, he explains that when his father-in-law was growing up, in poverty, Jif in the cupboard was a sign that things were going okay. Chasten now has the colors of the Jif label tattooed, flaglike, on his arm.
Speaking to reporters after the peanut-butter-donation exchange, Chasten was cautious. “I don’t really want to answer any political questions and things like that right now,” he said. Then, he got caught in the same elevator with those reporters. The elevator went to the wrong floor. Then it picked up an older couple. This is the hazard of being on the trail. “I feel like, if you guys wanna talk about the dogs, ice cream, you know, the weather, I can answer all those questions,” he said, “but I just wanna make sure I do everything right for the team.”
There was a beat, and then a reporter asked, “Which is your favorite dog?”
Jennifer Holdsworth, his campaign manager for that race, who is informally advising his presidential campaign, said that when he dropped out, “we had dozens of people walking out of their suites and running up to us, and basically being like, ‘Why are you dropping out? We have nowhere to go now after the first vote. We need you to stay in this, and if you don’t stay in this, then you better run for president.’ ” But she didn’t take it seriously at first, and neither did the rest of the staff. “We were like, Okay, well, that’s a big leap,” she said. “There was really no discussion of it, literally at all, within the team during the race.”
Buttigieg was more open to the crazy idea. “People said — a few people, a very small, few people said — that I should think about running for president, and I wasn’t sure whether to take that seriously or whether it’s just kind of a nice thing you say to any person you know personally who’s in elected office. And yet it lined up enough with the situation I saw around me that it began to remind me of moments when I decided to run for other offices. I saw a need that the office called for, and I saw it match in some way with what I had to offer.” He said he knew it would be an “underdog project” and that it would be “audacious, maybe even offensive, to some people, for me to try to undertake it.”
He was also concerned about losing again. “It was pointed out to me that you could only go so far collecting participation ribbons,” he said. “So running for DNC and, frankly, losing worked out really well for me. Running and losing for something twice in a row usually means you’re gonna be done with politics for at least a while.”
“He has no way out of South Bend other than doing this, really,” the senior Democratic consultant I spoke to said. “The DNC race was really smart because it put him in front of all of these people nationally. The mechanics of running for president — there’s really only a few hundred people who help prop you up until the first vote is cast, and they all had him on their radar. He has a mind for networking.” Hiring Lis Smith, now his campaign spokeswoman, for the DNC race was a kind of aggro move for Buttigieg. She is well known and well liked by the national media but disliked by many of her fellow Democratic stagehands, in that particular way a certain kind of woman often finds herself disliked. Smith, is the highest-profile member of a staff that tallies in the 30s. “If he can keep himself in the spotlight, he’ll attract good hires,” the senior Democratic consultant said. “The problem is all of these candidates are going to have their moment in the sun. When the spotlight isn’t on him, and the world isn’t moving organically for him, will it all still work?”
Lesser — who, serving the people of Massachusetts, has endorsed Elizabeth Warren’s campaign — said Buttigieg was “never the type of person on campus who ran around in a pinstripe suit glad-handing everybody.” Instead, he would “reach out to and chat with and buck up students who had setbacks,” a subtler and more effective form of making a political impression. When, as a recent Harvard graduate, Lesser was in charge of luggage on Obama’s 2008 campaign, Buttigieg drove out to Gary, Indiana, “just to help me unload everything and then left.” Obama wasn’t ever going to be there, he said. “There was no glory in that. He wasn’t getting face time with the senator.” Lesser, who, again, has endorsed Warren, said, “A set of historic and once-in-a-lifetime events have coalesced around bringing him to this moment. He is not someone who was looking for power for power’s sake.”
Corey Johnson, speaker of the New York City Council, said he’d never met Buttigieg when he received a call from him earlier this year, asking him to attend a dinner hosted in his honor by the author and liberal Twitter personality Molly Jong-Fast. The day of the event, Buttigieg followed up the call with a text urging him to come. They met and talked, and soon Johnson watched in awe as the spark he saw “turned into a bonfire.” He said he’d introduced Buttigieg at a fund-raiser just a few months later and was “literally bombarded” with messages from “people who I know and who I don’t know who follow me on social media, gay and straight,” who were upset that they didn’t get a chance to attend the event and meet the candidate. “In New York City, I felt a real groundswell of organic support for him.” That’s likely why, after Buttigieg formally kicks off his campaign on April 14 in South Bend, he’ll be flying to New York, then Iowa, then New York again, and finally New Hampshire.
Which is where we were, walking down a main street in Concord, surrounded by photographers who walked backward in front of us to document the scene. “There’s a kind of whiplash to it,” Buttigieg said, “but it’s a good thing. The speedup of it, the trajectory of it, has definitely been more dramatic than we had expected. But we also prepared by putting together a good team, knowing that, sooner or later, if our theory of the case was right, we were going to grow. We didn’t know that we’d explode onto the scene this early in the year, and that creates the challenge of making sure that we can sustain that energy. But I think the way you outlive the flavor-of-the-month period is through substance. We’re gonna have a substantive process.”
What does that mean? I have no idea. The campaign website, Pete for America, doesn’t feature a policy section, something that has caught the attention of critics who say Buttigieg is an empty suit — or, in his case, empty dress pants plus a white or blue shirt with the sleeves rolled up (tie, but no blazer). Buttigieg talks in specifics about the Electoral College (he wants to get rid of it) and the Supreme Court (he imagines an extreme reconfiguration, with 15 judges instead of nine, five of them confirmed by unanimous vote of the other ten, a way of ensuring nonpartisanship, he says). On other matters, he is less detailed. “I’m very specific on policy. I just think that we need to talk about values first. You can’t just expect people to be able to derive your values by looking at the minutiae of your policy proposals,” he told me.
“Elizabeth Warren is sort of running laps around people right now in terms of producing policy,” Axelrod told me. “He will have to build out some of his policy ideas. But the main thing is, how do you go from an organization that won a race in a venue that is smaller than a congressional district and scale that up to a national campaign? That’s challenging. In that regard, the early success is a mixed blessing.” He added, “Now you’re in the game and you’re drinking from a fire hose, and you have to scale up very, very quickly.”
Speaking by phone a few days later, I asked Buttigieg if he was afraid he would fuck this up. “Anytime you’re in a position of responsibility, you’re afraid of fucking it up. Not only when your own projects or future are at stake but, especially, when others are counting on you,” he said. “I also don’t want to get too far ahead of ourselves talking about why this is working, because not a vote has been cast. I haven’t won anything other than a few media cycles.”
*This article appears in the April 15, 2019, issue of New York Magazine. Subscribe Now!
Olivia Nuzzi



Apr. 13, 2019
Trump and Kim Tease Another Pointless Peace Summit

The negotiations with North Korea may be stalled, but President Trump’s effort to win a Nobel Peace Prize for holding peace summits and building a beautiful friendship with Kim Jong-un definitely isn’t. On Saturday morning, the president responded approvingly to news that Kim would be open to a third meetup between the two leaders — under certain potentially unmeetable conditions.
Per Korean state media, Kim gave a speech on Friday in which he sharply criticized the U.S. for failing to offer peace on at-all-agreeable terms, but added that he felt he had a good relationship with Trump and was willing to try another summit provided that the U.S. “quit its current method of calculation and approach us with a new one” before the year’s end. Also on Friday, Kim reshuffled North Korea’s leadership, further consolidating his power over the country as its economy reels, in part, because of sanctions.
On Thursday, before meeting with South Korean president Moon Jae-in at the White House, Trump had signaled his desire to try again with Kim, explaining that he was optimistic about future negotiations, though he acknowledged that they might only produce “various smaller deals.” Trump also bragged, yet again, about how great a relationship he thinks he has with the totalitarian. “I enjoy the summits,” the president said. “I enjoy being with the chairman,” he continued, insisting that Kim was “a person I’ve gotten to know very well, and respect.”
Trump emphasized his alleged chemistry with Kim again on Saturday, tweeting that “our personal relationship remains very good, perhaps the term excellent would be even more accurate.” He claimed “a third summit would be good in that we fully understand where we each stand.”
But unfortunately for Trump — and peace — the U.S. and North Korea remain very far apart when it comes to any possible deal. It’s the same place they were standing at the end of the failed talks two months ago in Hanoi, where the goal was to come up with a substantive agreement after failing to do that at the first summit in Singapore last June. The two sides still can’t agree on a definition of “denuclearization,” let alone how it would take place.
Trump continues to tell Kim that North Korea will become a big, bright star in the world once it gives up all its nuclear weapons, which remains the Trump administration’s precondition for removing sanctions. (The U.S. also wants North Korea to give up its chemical and biological weapons.) And while Kim has repeatedly said he is willing to give up his nukes, he also wants that process to be incremental, i.e., much easier to get around. North Korea has a well-earned reputation for deception when it comes to dealing with other countries, and it has refused to even entertain the idea of outside inspections of its arsenal, meaning it would not be possible to determine what it had and had not given up.
Kim sure sounded pessimistic about the prospects of a deal in his speech on Friday. He said that the “completely unrealizable plans” the U.S. brought to the Hanoi summit “raised strong questions about whether the steps we took under our strategic decision were right, and gave us a sense of caution about whether the U.S. is even really trying to improve the DPRK-US relationship.” He also implied hostilities could resume on account of the failed peace negotiations. So on Thursday, Trump insisted that the goal of engaging Kim was still “the big deal” — that “we have to get rid of [North Korea’s] nuclear weapons.” On Friday, Kim more or less said, “Come up with something we like better — or else.”
Photo ops and empty enthusiasm aside, the U.S. has gotten no meaningful concessions from North Korea as a result of the two Trump-Kim meetings over the last year, and there’s little reason to presume a third will make any difference.
North Korea may have temporarily stopped testing its ballistic missiles, but it has kept building its nuclear arsenal. Kim has also vowed that he will not cave under U.S. sanctions, the regime has threatened to restart its missile and nuclear-weapon testing if the U.S. doesn’t end them, and there has been plenty of evidence that it has been actively flaunting the sanctions as much as possible.
Since this nonsensical peacemaking process began, Kim has gotten long-sought handshakes and peacemaking publicity from his meetings with Trump and Moon. He’s also gotten Trump to call off joint military exercises with South Korea, go against his own administration to block a new round of harsher sanctions, and tease the idea of making countries like South Korea pay for the privilege of having an in-country U.S. military presence. As a bonus for Kim, the world leader who once bragged about how much bigger his nuclear button was has continued to publicly profess, ad nauseam, how much he thinks of Kim, how great their relationship is, and how well-off North Korea’s future will be under Kim’s leadership.
Aside from the fact that the Hanoi talks should have never happened, since there was arguably no chance they would amount to anything, Trump reportedly held his ground as he should have. Kim scoffed and the summit and negotiations were over. Now, less than two months later, after making additional concessions without reciprocation, Trump is indicating that he loves summits almost as much as he loves talking about his personal relationship with Kim Jong-un. There probably won’t be a peace deal if a third summit happens, but there will definitely be a spectacle.
Chas Danner



Apr. 12, 2019
Ilhan Omar Never Stood a Chance

Ilhan Omar has courted controversy ever since she transformed, in the public’s conception, from a telegenic symbol of American pluralism to an actual person with actual opinions. In the months after her swearing-in to Congress, the Minnesota representative has been strident in her criticism of Saudi Arabia and Israel. Both are American allies, but it’s her position on the latter country that has prompted members of her own party to turn against her. The past two months have seen her accused varyingly of anti-Semitism, disloyalty to the United States, and, most recently, of downplaying the 9/11 terrorist attacks. The first criticism can be attributed to her suggestion that American support for Israel is “all about the Benjamins” — a seeming nod to the bigoted trope that rich Jews control the world. The second and third are more flagrantly Islamophobic in origin.
The backlash came to a head this week after footage surfaced of Omar speaking about Islamophobia at a Council on American-Islamic Relations event last month. “Far too long we have lived with the discomfort of being a second-class citizen and frankly, I’m tired of it and every single Muslim in this country should be tired of it,” Omar said to an audience gathered in Los Angeles. “CAIR was founded after 9/11 because they recognized that some people did something,” she said, gesturing as if to separate herself from “some people,” “and that all of us were starting to lose access to our civil liberties.”
Conservatives seized on Omar’s characterization of 9/11 as “some people did something” to cast it as an effort to trivialize the attack. President Trump on Friday tweeted a video that intercut her repeatedly saying “some people did something” and footage of the 9/11 attacks, with the caption, “We will never forget!” Representative Dan Crenshaw, a Texas Republican, tweeted that her comments were “unbelievable.” Republican National Committee chair Ronna McDaniel added that Omar is “anti-American,” while the New York Post on Thursday published a cover photo of airplanes colliding with the Twin Towers. “Rep. Ilhan Omar: 9/11 was ‘some people did something,’” the headline read. “Here’s your something: 2,977 dead by terrorism.” The photo echoed imagery from an Islamophobic poster displayed at the West Virginia statehouse last month, which pictured Omar in front of the collapsing World Trade Center. “‘Never forget,’ you said,” the caption reads. “I am the proof — you have forgotten.” Such an ungenerous interpretation of her remarks is only possible if one is inclined to believe that Omar sympathizes more with terrorists than her murdered countrymen. That she spoke them in the course of decrying Islamophobia makes it especially disconcerting that her political opponents would decontextualize them to fan the flames — she receives regular death threats on the basis of her faith, including from one New York man who threatened recently to “put a bullet in her fucking skull.”
Omar’s imprecision regarding Israel can be frustrating for her supporters. Even those who engage with her geopolitical critiques in good faith might find her deployment — intentional or inadvertent — of anti-Semitic tropes unforgivable, were she not so apologetic about her self-proclaimed ignorance and backed by a vocal cohort of Jewish-American progressives who insist that her comments were directed at a government — not a people — whose supporters routinely accuse its critics of anti-Semitism to stifle debate. But it grows increasingly apparent that efforts to discredit her are rooted in a larger project for which her comments are mere pretext. One of the first two Muslim women ever in Congress was always likely to face smears equating her with terrorism and questioning her loyalty and fitness to serve. Such are the wages of embodying an existential threat to a politics that has spent decades profiting from fear of Muslims, immigrants, and — more recently — refugees and asylum seekers, and vowing ruthlessness toward them in response.
Omar is a Congressional “first,” and her opponents smell blood in the water. Even her less-spotlit Muslim woman counterpart, Michigan representative Rashida Tlaib, has faced dubious allegations of anti-Semitism and having terrorist sympathies. (Tlaib is Palestinian-American.) The political value of attacking both is apparent. For Republicans, it enables them to deflect from their own bigotry, personified most recently by a president who has attempted to ban Muslim immigration, dissolve the American asylum system, and cast Muslims as latent or active terrorists while demonizing brown-skinned immigrants more broadly. For centrist Democrats, entertaining the suggestion that Omar is anti-Semitic is an opportunity to signal their commitment to pluralism while shoring up their ties to Israel and its supporters. Both rely on a willful misreading of her intentions that is more compatible with anti-Muslim stereotypes than with her actual, documented opposition to human- and civil-rights violators of all stripes.
Such reductionism is not a recent trend. Congressional “firsts” have long been targeted by political opportunists and bigoted peers, dating back to Reconstruction. Following the Civil War, lies underpinned by stereotypes were how anxieties regarding free black people holding elected office in the South were articulated. “One cannot study Reconstruction without first frankly facing the facts of universal lying,” wrote W.E.B. DuBois in his history of the period, Black Reconstruction. “There was not a single great black leader [of that era] against whom almost unprintable allegations were not repeatedly and definitely made.” Hiram Rhodes Revels, the first black U.S. congressman ever elected, in 1870 faced legal challenges from white Democratic congressmen who claimed he was ineligible because he had not been a citizen long enough, having only been granted said status a few years prior with the 14th Amendment and 1866 Civil Rights Act. (These challenges were later overruled.) Parroting the prejudices of the era, historians and artists attempted to cast Reconstruction as a time when black vice, sloth, and stupidity transformed government into a corrupt and chaotic free-for-all. D.W. Griffith’s 1915 film, Birth of a Nation, famously portrayed black congressmen voting on bills with their boots off, feet on their desks, gorging on fried chicken.
This is how power and orthodoxy respond to threats. Neither has encountered a black Muslim congresswoman before, or such a vocal critic of Israeli policy and the lobbying that supports it. Political discourse has reached the point, with Omar, where good-faith debate over her deployment of anti-Semitic tropes has been largely displaced by pure Islamophobic id. Opponents regularly equate her with terrorists, riling up voters, politicians, and pundits who already believe that the proper response to Islam is violence. Trump’s inflammatory rhetoric has already inspired successful and attempted terror attacks — including by Cesar Sayoc, who sent mail bombs to prominent critics of the president, and Robert Bowers, who killed 11 people in a Pittsburgh synagogue after being inspired about a Trump-peddled conspiracy theory about criminal immigrants.
But Omar’s treatment is a logical extension of decades of Islamophobic rhetoric and policy — much as the Reconstruction-era response to black congressmen was an extension of centuries of anti-black sentiment and violence. Perhaps it should have been expected in a scenario where Republicans — whose platform and standard-bearer, Trump, call for the exclusion and maltreatment of Muslims, refugees, and asylum seekers — came face-to-face with a Muslim refugee and former asylum seeker from Somalia who is now one of their peers. Political disagreement was bound to define the encounter. But anti-Muslim bigotry is not innate — it is a choice that Omar’s detractors continue to make, and the dangers of doing are only becoming more apparent. Now that Trump has fanned the flames, the backlash only stands to intensify further. The costs are already steep, and they will only get higher.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 12, 2019
Trump’s Sanctuary-Cities Threat Is His Latest Bid to Govern by Sabotage

On Friday, the president announced that he is considering busing undocumented immigrants and asylum seekers from the southern border to liberal cities across the United States — and then releasing them onto the streets, in the hope that this would lead to so much chaos and/or violence that congressional Democrats will have no choice but to acquiesce to his demands on immigration.
“Due to the fact that Democrats are unwilling to change our very dangerous immigration laws, we are indeed, as reported, giving strong considerations to placing Illegal Immigrants in Sanctuary Cities only,” Donald Trump tweeted. “The Radical Left always seems to have an Open Borders, Open Arms policy — so this should make them very happy!”
Here, Trump vouched for a Washington Post report that specifically suggested that the White House had repeatedly implored Immigration and Customs Enforcement to dump undocumented immigrants in Nancy Pelosi’s congressional district — as a means of coercing House Democrats into granting the administration concessions in budget negotiations.
In other words, the president is ostensibly threatening to deliberately inflict harm on Americans who live in areas controlled by Democrats until a coequal branch starts taking his marching orders. And, in this respect, Trump’s proposal to release immigrants in sanctuary cities (i.e., cities that do not fully cooperate with federal immigration authorities) isn’t anything new.
Less than three months into his presidency, Trump threatened to deliberately sabotage America’s individual insurance market until Democrats agreed to support repealing and replacing Obamacare:
Trump eventually did cancel those cost-sharing payments (a move that did have its desired effect). Meanwhile, his Health Department cut funding for the law’s outreach groups; slashed Obamacare’s advertising budget by 90 percent; spent a portion of the remaining ad budget on propaganda calling for the law’s repeal; cut the open-enrollment period by 45 days; announced that it would be taking healthcare.gov (where people can enroll in Obamacare online) offline nearly every Sunday during that time period, for “maintenance” purposes; and described Obamacare as “a bad deal” that Americans “won’t be convinced to sign up for” in official public statements — all in a transparent bid to dent the law’s popularity by engineering a spike in insurance premiums.
A few months later, the Trump administration canceled the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, thereby subjecting 700,000 Dreamers to the threat of deportation. Trump never made an affirmative policy argument for this decision; in fact, almost immediately after making it, the president claimed that he supported protections for undocumented immigrants who were brought to the United States as children and implored Congress to “legalize DACA (something the Obama Administration was unable to do).” The president’s only rationale for suspending the program was that it exceeded the executive branch’s constitutional authority. But this was patently disingenuous. This president has no compunction about testing the limits of his authority over immigration policy when he wants to — and, as a federal judge subsequently noted, “deferred action has been blessed by both the Supreme Court and Congress as a means to exercise enforcement discretion.”
In truth, Trump canceled DACA because he believed that he could ransom the Dreamers’ security for concessions on immigration policy. The president has openly acknowledged that this is his motivation. Last November, Trump told Politico that he did not want to negotiate over protections for Dreamers until the Supreme Court strikes down DACA (which lower courts have forced his administration to reinstate) because he believes he will have more leverage over Democrats once Dreamers are once again subject to threat of banishment from the only country they call home:
And, of course, the president recently shuttered the federal government for more than a month — deliberately inflicting economic hardship and governmental dysfunction on ordinary Americans — in a doomed attempt to force Nancy Pelosi to fund his border wall. At one point, the president suggested that he had the upper hand in the shutdown fight because “most of the workers not getting paid are Democrats.”
Thus, Trump’s sanctuary-cities proposal is consistent with his broader approach to governance over the past two years. It is perhaps more audacious — and arguably illegal — than his previous attempts to leverage his nihilism into concessions from Congress. But releasing undocumented immigrants into sanctuary cities isn’t any more morally odious than sabotaging America’s health-care system, subjecting hundreds of thousands of American-raised immigrants to the threat of deportation, or shuttering the federal government for weeks on end in a fit of pique. In fact, Trump’s new gambit is much less objectionable from a moral standpoint. After all, if one rejects his racist (and empirically baseless) presumptions about the effect that undocumented immigrants have on urban life, then he is essentially threatening to provide asylum-seekers with free transportation to cities that are currently in need of more labor, and which have proved to be especially accommodating to America’s newcomers.
As far as this president’s hostage-taking threats go, that’s a rather benign proposition.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 12, 2019
Could Trump’s Illegal Plan to Ship Migrants to ‘Sanctuary Cities’ Make Everyone Happy?

The Washington Post created a major buzz in political circles Thursday night when it reported the Trump administration had been kicking around the idea of transporting and releasing migrants detained at the border in districts represented in Congress by their Democratic “enemies,” or in cities that have “sanctuary” policies limiting cooperation with federal immigration enforcement efforts (Nancy Pelosi’s San Francisco, of course, qualifies under either approach).
Every administration official the Post talked to denied that any such plan was under active consideration, despite its apparent strong support from presidential adviser Stephen Miller, thought to be a bigger dog than ever after a recent purge of DHS. For one thing, federal immigration attorneys could find no discernible legal authority for taking such a step, particularly since federal judges tend to frown on using executive authority visibly to “punish” political enemies, which was clearly a major rationale for the proposal.
But just when the idea was thought to be one of those scary potential Trump administration policies that cooler heads would sidetrack, you-know-who gave it fresh momentum:
As my colleague Jonathan Chait observed, the migrants-to-the-cities idea reflects a general radicalization of the administration’s challenge to legal and political norms:
A related question is whether Trump’s tweets on the subject are just an act of trolling designed to put Democrats in a bad spot, or something that appeals to his (and Miller’s) crude but sometimes shrewd political instincts.
Once you think about it for a while, the migrants-to-the-cities policy does make sense from the perspective of xenophobic MAGA supporters living far from New York or Chicago or San Francisco, who count on Trump to protect them from the swarthy invaders that represent an existential threat to everything they cherish. The idea of “owning the libs” by exposing them directly and exclusively to the consequences of their unpatriotic policies makes it an even more emotionally satisfying proposition among angry conservatives. The underlying message to the president’s enemies is: You want these garbage people in our country? Then you take ‘em in your neighborhoods and streets and schools!
But there’s another side of the political coin on this subject: Though he meant it as a taunt, Trump may actually be right that accepting migrant families into their communities would make a lot of urban liberals happy. Despite the lurid picture of migrants Trump’s allies like to paint, these are hardly hardened “criminals.” Most immigrants with serious criminal records aren’t released anywhere other than back across the border. They do represent a fresh source of inexpensive labor at a time when labor markets have become very tight. For people in cities that don’t fear them, migrants could represent an important new economic resource, particularly for places where construction is booming, as the New York Times notes:
As Splinter’s Libby Watson points out, dumping migrants anywhere without appropriate support would be horridly inhumane — not to the host communities, but to migrants themselves:
But Watson goes on to suggest that the “own the libs” rationale for such a policy doesn’t hold up:
So while it’s almost certainly not going to happen, for all sorts of reasons (including the law), it’s worth noting that the administration’s assumption that people everywhere would freak out at having to deal with relatively small numbers of resettled migrants could be dead wrong. That doesn’t mean we can just happily move to a country where polarized attitudes on immigration and other subjects can be accommodated by two sets of policies that together please most of the people most of the time. But it may show that the myth of hypocritical lefties who are bigoted as everyone else is just that.
Perhaps it could even become a popular slogan: Dear Migrants: Welcome to New York City!
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 12, 2019
Echoing Trump, McConnell Calls for Making 2020 a ‘Referendum on Socialism’

Perhaps he was just stating the obvious, but it did have the ring of an official announcement when Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell suggested a GOP-wide message for 2020, as the Hill reports:
In case reporters somehow didn’t get it, McConnell restated the proposition:
So there you have it: Red Scare 2020 is going to be a big and abiding thing. This clearly syncs Senate Republicans with the Trump reelection bid. It’s long been clear that his 2020 strategy will be what you’d expect from an abidingly unpopular president leading an unpopular party with unpopular policy positions: a relentlessly negative attack on his Democratic opponent using every weapon available. There’s some irony involved in a Trump-led party accusing its opponents of “extremism,” but it’s an age-old tactic: When you cannot credibly occupy the “political center,” you can always try to push your opponents even further from the center than you are.
And “socialism” is a time-tested epithet for left-of-center politicians and parties. With older voters, of course, it connotes not just big government but the “scientific socialism” of Marxism-Leninism, along with the Soviet imperialism that formed so large a part of the experience of Americans in and before the baby boom. But it’s a big target generally, as David Graham has explained:
The “socialism” label for Democratic policy proposals could also help expose divisions in the Donkey Party’s ranks over significant variations in how to define the Green New Deal and how to implement Medicare for All, as candidates not named Bernie Sanders (the only self-identified “socialist” in the presidential field, so far at least) try to distinguish their approaches from his.
On the other hand, conservatives have been calling liberals “socialists” for eons, and it’s no automatic magic bullet. Most notoriously, Barack Obama was relentlessly (if ridiculously) called a “socialist” by Republican-aligned media types going into the 2012 election, and it didn’t appear to work. For that matter, Trump himself deployed the “socialist” epithet toward Democrats going into the 2018 midterms, to no discernible effect.
But when you can’t say much about your own party’s record other than pointing at economic indicators and hooting “Mine! Mine!” then creating and burnishing negative associations for the other side may be the only available strategy. So you can expect the Red Scare to continue during this, the 100th anniversary of the original panic over socialists and communists supervised by Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer. It’s what self-described superpatriots do when all else fails.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 12, 2019
White Nationalism Is the Republican Party’s Meal Ticket

The Republican Party lost whatever credibility it had as a sincere partner in curbing white nationalism when its delegates selected Donald Trump as the party’s nominee for president in 2016. That credibility, such that it was, continued to erode over the following two and a half years as Republican members of Congress coalesced behind President Trump’s immigration policies, which were designed by advisers like Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon, who describe Latin American immigrants as an invading criminal horde, and sold in Fox News segments drumming up white fears of a nonwhite majority. The GOP arguably hit rock bottom with its continued support of Steve King, a Republican congressman whose openly racist politics — including his denial of nonwhite contributions to Western civilization — were rebuked by his own party for the first time this year. (He remains in office.) But it continued to plumb the depths on Tuesday, when Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee called on Candace Owens to testify during a hearing about the threat of white nationalist violence following terrorist attacks in Charlottesville, Virginia, and Christchurch, New Zealand.
Owens is a black right-wing media personality, communications director for the conservative advocacy group Turning Point USA, and a favorite of the Infowars circuit. Predictably, she took Tuesday’s opportunity to deny that racism is a particular problem in the Republican Party or the conservative movement more broadly. She called the Southern strategy — which during the 1960s saw the GOP embrace an anti-civil-rights platform to attract bigoted white southern voters — a “myth,” and accused Representative Ted Lieu of believing that “black people are stupid” because he played footage of Owens tacitly endorsing Adolf Hitler’s nationalism. Her unseriousness overshadowed the actual authorities who were invited to testify by Democrats, including Kristen Clarke, a civil-rights lawyer, and Mohammad Abu-Salha, whose two daughters and son-in-law were killed in 2015 in a suspected hate crime. There is an argument to be made that Owens was invited to distract the public from an issue that threatened to indict too many Republican legislators and voters regarding their complicity. But her presence had the unintended side effect of highlighting that complicity instead.
The bar for entry as a black Republican and YouTube celebrity turned congressional expert witness is low, and seems to privilege two traits: an enthusiasm for reassuring white Republicans that they are not racist, and a willingness to be a public symbol of their purported non-racism. Today, Owens is the most visible exemplar of both, and of the characteristics they require — namely, a relentless dishonesty in the face of factual evidence and an unquenchable thirst for the spotlight. She is also something of a last resort. The GOP has so thoroughly discredited itself as a party even remotely concerned with the plight of the average black American — and especially the average black American woman — that its white standard-bearers are willing to bestow legitimacy, expert status, and a certain degree of party spokesmanship on practically any black person who toes the party line. People like Owens have become Republicans’ go-to retort to allegations of racism. And her deployment betrays the belief, endemic to the GOP, that racism’s existence is a matter of opinion that can be debunked by any random black person’s say-so.
This is demonstrated by the continued success of Diamond and Silk, a pair of black female performers whose comedic tours — attended primarily by white conservatives — hinge on assuring their audiences that their support for Trump does not connote bigotry. It was demonstrated when Michael Cohen testified before Congress that Trump was a bigot, citing times when the president referred to black people as “stupid” and prone to living in degraded conditions by choice, only to have Representative Mark Meadows, a North Carolina Republican, respond by parading a black Trump employee before the committee as physical evidence to the contrary.
Racism is measurable, of course, in disparities ranging from wealth gaps to residential segregation to incarceration rates. But its deadly nature is perhaps no more vivid than after a mass shooting, when the bodies of Muslim worshippers in Christchurch or Jewish ones in Pittsburgh are dead and bleeding on the ground. Collectively, they are irrefutable evidence. Meanwhile, Owens’s claim to the credibility that allows her to dismiss such violence as overblown, or part of a Democratic plot to frighten nonwhite voters, is that she received racist phone calls from a white classmate in high school. Summoning her to Washington, D.C., to cast doubt on racism’s dangers demonstrates an irreverence on the part of Republicans that transcends the unseriousness of its vessel. It is downright sinister — not to mention denialist — regarding the GOP’s debt to the very white nationalist movement in whose name said violence is committed.
And even if the rate of deaths caused by white nationalists pales in comparison to those caused by car collisions or heart disease, that the former is powerful enough to inspire one person to kill 11 others in a single day is, at the very least, worth taking seriously. House Republicans this week treated it as theoretical, or worse, a joke. They presented to Congress and to Americans refuting testimony from a social-media provocateur whose entire brand is to lie about racism. It might have been innocuous had it not sought to obscure the toxic ideology that simultaneously radicalizes young white men, inspires mass murder, and questions the human worth of nonwhite people, all while enabling Republicans to capture the White House in 2016, against all expert predictions. The House GOP knew entering Tuesday’s hearing that the 2020 election is around the corner. It is in their best interest to save their meal ticket until it can once more be redeemed, rather than discard it simply to undermine the social ills that accompany it.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 12, 2019
Massive Stop & Shop Strike Raises the Stakes for 2020 Democrats

Organized labor is already poised to play a significant role in the Democratic primary. But now Stop & Shop workers have raised the stakes to new heights, launching the largest private-sector strike since 2016. On Friday, 31,000 workers in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut are on strike for a second day. A speedy resolution appears unlikely, and some 2020 candidates are already wading into the dispute.
Workers, who are represented by the United Food and Commercial Workers, initially authorized a strike in March, as negotiations with Stop & Shop began to falter; they’ve been working without a contract since the end of February. A press release on the union’s website outlines its opposition to the grocery chain’s latest contract proposal, which would require full-time employees to pay an additional $893 for their health-care premiums over the next three years. Part-time employees would have to pay $603 more for their employee-only health coverage. According to Boston.com, the union also opposes plans to reduce the number of working cashiers and offset the difference with self-checkout lanes. In a statement emailed to New York on Friday afternoon, a representative for Stop & Shop said the chain is “disappointed that the UFCW chose to order a work stoppage in an attempt to disrupt service at our stores,” and said it has “contingency plans in place.” The company noted that its proposal did not contain pay cuts and argued that “the unions proposed a contract that would increase the company’s costs. This would make our company less competitive in the mostly non-union New England food retail marketplace.”
A handful of Democratic candidates responded swiftly to news of the strike. As of Friday afternoon, Senators Cory Booker, Kamala Harris, Kirsten Gillibrand, and Bernie Sanders had all tweeted support for striking workers. And Senator Elizabeth Warren, who represents many of the workers, walked a picket line in Somerville, Massachusetts.
For primary candidates, the Stop & Shop strike doesn’t change the dynamics of the race so much as it amplifies them. The nation was already gripped by an ongoing national strike wave. Data released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in February depicts an escalating number of work stoppages, defined as strikes or walkouts. More workers walked off the job in 2018 than they have since 1986, according to Time magazine; the actual number of stoppages was the highest it had been since 2007. Organized labor wasn’t dormant before 2018, but as educators and flight attendants and domestic workers make new strides, they keep labor power — and the notion of the strike itself — firmly in the public square.
Unions aren’t rushing to formally anoint a chosen candidate; they’ve unveiled more incremental endorsement processes instead, as the American Federation of Teachers told New York last month. It’s likely that some, if not most, will wait to endorse until the Democratic National Convention nears. They may even wait to endorse until after the party has chosen a candidate.
Meanwhile, the strike wave looks set to continue. Chalkbeat reported on Wednesday that educators employed by five charter school networks have voted to authorize a collective strike. In New York City, some pre-K teachers have authorized a one-day strike on May 2. Flight attendants for Air Wisconsin may also go on strike soon; a representative for AFA-CWA, which represents the flight attendants, told the Appleton Post-Crescent their members only make $15,000 a year. In this climate, candidates must work for labor’s vote. Support for striking workers may well come to distinguish the field’s furthest-left counterparts from their moderate and conservative competitors — though it’s an open question if candidates who send pro-labor tweets will follow through with pro-labor policy proposals.
This post has been updated.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 12, 2019
Tax Refunds Are Down. That’s a Threat to Trump — and the Economy.

Republicans once thought that the Trump tax cuts would save Paul Ryan’s majority. Now, they’ll be lucky if that legislation doesn’t cost Donald Trump a second term.
The GOP’s high hopes for its tax law weren’t entirely baseless. True, the president’s plan for “reforming the tax code” looked more like a plot for robbing the federal Treasury on the one percent’s behalf. But Republicans did set aside some hush money for the witnesses in the middle-class: Under their plan, roughly 80 percent of American households would see their tax burdens decline (however modestly). And since the GOP funded this regressive tax package with deficit-financing (instead of cuts to social programs that help working people), ordinary Americans really would benefit from the legislation in the immediate term.
And the immediate term was the GOP’s overriding concern. With the botched Obamacare repeal effort hanging like a noose around the party’s swing-district incumbents — and Donald Trump stoking the Democratic base’s angry energy on a daily basis — Republicans needed voters to realize that Paul Ryan & Co. had cut their taxes posthaste. Which is to say, they needed taxpayers to see the relief in their paychecks by November 2018, not in the tax refunds that wouldn’t be mailed until months after the midterms. Thus, the Trump administration reportedly pressured the IRS to err on the side of withholding too little from Americans’ paychecks “so people will see big increases in their take-home pay ahead of this year’s midterm elections.”
This now looks like a political own goal of historic proportions. Even with (allegedly) light withholding, the tax bill’s breaks for middle-class people weren’t large enough to attract much notice. Between changes in salaries, health-care premiums, and 401(k) contributions, most Americans didn’t detect much tax relief in their paychecks. The tax cuts actually became less popular after they took effect. And of course, Nancy Pelosi took the Speaker’s gavel.
Meanwhile, all across America, consumers started making plans for their forthcoming tax refunds. Roughly three-quarters of households usually get money back from the IRS — and for many American families, that deposit is the largest lump sum they see all year. Thus, millions of people structure their household finances in anticipation of their rebates, planning big-ticket purchases or to write down debt (for this reason, mortgage delinquencies almost always decline sharply in February and March). And Americans had reason to expect their refunds to be even higher than usual this year, what with those tax cuts that the Republicans had been promising.
Now, many are suffering an unwelcome surprise: As of March 29, total tax refunds were about $6 billion lower than over the same period in 2018. In an economy as large as the United States’, that isn’t an enormous figure — this year’s average tax refund is only about $20 less than it was last year. But that modest reduction is not evenly spread across the population. Many Americans are seeing slightly higher tax refunds than in the past. But 1.6 million other Americans — who received tax rebates in 2018 — are discovering that they actually owe the government money this time around. And the impact of more than 1 million Americans experiencing a sudden, sharp decline in their anticipated purchasing power has proven far greater than that of a much larger group of taxpayers seeing modest gains.
This reality is reflected in opinion polling — a new CBS survey finds that nearly three out of four Americans believe the Trump tax cuts either raised their taxes or left them unchanged. But the development’s most significant ramifications can be seen in consumer behavior. As CBS News reported earlier this month:
This development is a much greater threat to Trump than his tax law’s dreary poll numbers. One of the primary reasons so many people lost their tax refunds this year is that the Trump tax cuts phased out many deductions that disproportionately benefit residents of blue states (such as the state and local tax deduction, which is more valuable in areas that have high state and local taxes). Thus, Republican strongholds have largely escaped “refund shock,” which has been concentrated in high-tax, Democratic areas. But “red” and “blue” America share one macroeconomy. And if consumer spending in blue areas drops off enough, it could take red America’s economic growth down with it.
The auto sector has led U.S. growth during the post-2008 recovery. But last month, retail auto sales fell by 4 percent. And if that dip turns into a trend, the implications for the American economy in 2020 could be significant. As Bloomberg’s Danielle DiMartino-Booth explains:
It’s worth noting that, in the abstract, there’s nothing nefarious about reducing tax withholding — after all, if you receive a refund during tax season, that effectively means that you gave Uncle Sam an interest-free loan the previous year (which is money you could have been investing for a return). But there’s a reason why the field of behavioral economics exists. Human beings are not perfectly rational creatures. And how we perceive (or misperceive) reality can have very real material consequences.
Bloomberg’s assessment of the macroeconomic outlook is exceptionally gloomy. And it’s entirely possible that our economy will shake the current dip in consumer spending like a passing cold. But it’s also conceivable that the tax-refund-disappointment-induced drop in aggregate demand will hasten the end of the expansion that Donald Trump inherited (which has been, by far, the president’s greatest political asset). And if that does happen, then the Trump administration’s (alleged) efforts to fiddle with withholding will have backfired not only in PR terms, but also in concrete, economic ones.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 12, 2019
In Bill Barr, Trump Has Finally Found His New Fixer

Most weeks, New York Magazine writer-at-large Frank Rich speaks with contributor Alex Carp about the biggest stories in politics and culture. Today, Bill Barr’s cover-up in plain sight, Joe Biden’s fitness for office, and Pete Buttigieg’s sprint up the polls.
Bill Barr’s assertion that “spying did occur” against the Trump campaign has brought condemnations of impropriety from congressional Democrats and career intelligence officials, and raised suspicion that the attorney general is covering for Trump. Has Trump, at long last, finally found his Roy Cohn?
When you invoke Roy Cohn, you have to specify which Roy Cohn. There’s the New York Cohn of the 1970s and ’80s, the Mob-connected fixer who enabled Trump’s rise, of course. But there’s also the earlier, Washington Cohn: the smear artist who abetted Joe McCarthy’s witch hunt to expose supposed Commies in the United States Army during the 1950s. The brilliantly perverse achievement of Barr is that he combines both Roy Cohns in a single package. He’s a fixer for Trump, as evidenced by his unsupported conclusion that the Mueller report lets the president off the legal hook for his manifold efforts to obstruct justice. But Barr is also the McCarthy-era Cohn, sliming a “group of leaders there at the upper echelon” of government agencies for spying without offering any specifics or evidence.
That said, Barr is more insidious than either Roy Cohn. The Cohn of the McCarthy era was the chief counsel to a Senate committee; the New York Cohn was a lawyer in private practice. William Barr is the attorney general — the chief law-enforcement officer of the United States. And he is just getting started in his career in nonenforcement. He is poised to bowdlerize the Mueller report with redactions whose legitimacy cannot be verified and is stonewalling congressional efforts to read the report in full. He is in position to assist Steve Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, as he buries documents whose exposure Trump may fear more than Mueller’s evidence — his tax returns. And, as the GOP operative turned Never Trumper Rick Wilson has pointed out, Barr’s accusations of “spying” are designed not only to feed right-wing conspiracy theories about a “deep state” plotting to subvert Trump but also to sully “the future public, private, and legal testimony of members of the DOJ, FBI, and intelligence community who have seen the damning data on Trump and his claque.” The goal? “To intimidate anyone who would investigate Trump’s vast portfolio of corruption and obstruction of justice, both before and after he took office.”
Barr, let’s recall, was more highly-thought-of only a few weeks ago. As the successor to Matthew Whitaker, a low-rent scam artist with not even minimal qualifications to serve as acting attorney general, he didn’t have a tough act to follow. He was routinely praised as an “institutionalist” who would protect the Justice Department — though his advocates never explained why any true institutionalist would enlist in an administration that above all is devoted to the destruction of governmental institutions and defiance of the rule of law. In this sense, Barr was initially welcomed as another iteration of those previous “adults in the room” who would protect America from their boss’s worst instincts: John Kelly, Rex Tillerson, Jim Mattis, H. R. McMaster, and Gary Cohn, the chief economic adviser who sold his soul for a tax cut rather than publicly break with a president who gave a pass to neo-Nazis chanting “Jews will not replace us” in Charlottesville.
In the end, no Trump Cabinet member ever rises above the common denominator of his or her peers, a perpetual rogue’s gallery that, from Mnuchin to Wilbur Ross to Betsy DeVos to (RIP) Kirstjen Nielsen, makes the bar in Star Wars look like King Arthur’s court.
After addressing comments from several women who said he touched them inappropriately or made them uncomfortable, Joe Biden joked about their complaints during a conference appearance and told reporters “I’m not sorry for anything I’ve ever done.” Is he showing himself unfit to be a Democratic candidate in 2020?
Biden’s unchecked, apparently lifelong habit of handsy behavior as well as his clueless explanations and pseudo-apologies for it are lamentable, but they don’t disqualify him from seeking the nomination. What does make him a subpar choice for the presidency is his record in public life. It’s not only that he behaved atrociously during the Clarence Thomas hearings but that he still refuses to take any responsibility for that behavior. Speaking of Anita Hill, he recently said that “she was abused through the hearing … taken advantage of … attacked.” All true. And his own role in this travesty? “I regret I couldn’t come up with a way to get her the kind of hearing she deserved.” He was the chairman of the Judiciary Committee presiding over that hearing, for heaven’s sake, not an impotent bystander. This mealymouthed excuse of the “mistakes were made (but not by me)” genre suggests that Biden has not gained the wisdom you might expect at the age of 76. Nor is it an anomaly in a career that has been adorably avuncular (though not to those women he touched inappropriately) but wrong-headed on major issues, including the struggle for racial desegregation, reproductive rights, and the Iraq war.
What’s been most instructive about the Biden controversy is how it is spun and weaponized by Republicans. With predictable shamelessness Trump didn’t let his record of serial sexual assault stand in his way as he mocked Biden for relative misdemeanors, but he did so even as he floated the appointment of another practitioner of serious sexual misconduct, Herman Cain, to the Federal Reserve. Other conservatives cried crocodile tears for poor, put-upon Biden so they could wield him as a club to portray Democrats as narrow-minded elitists: “Don’t do it, Joe,” counseled Peggy Noonan, asserting that the “bitter, resentful, divisive” Democratic Party is against “white people in general, and white males in particular.” Is there anything more disingenuous than whiny white writers playing the victim card on the editorial pages of The Wall Street Journal? If Noonan’s caricature of Democrats were true, Biden would not still be well ahead in every poll of Democratic primary voters.
What will do Biden in, I imagine, will not be his promiscuous touching of women but his general political doofus-ness. His past presidential campaigns, or near-campaigns, now dating back to 1980, have been fiascoes, right through his 2008 candidacy, which folded after he drew less than one percent in the Iowa caucuses. (The best portrait of Biden as presidential candidate is in Richard Ben Cramer’s classic campaign book, What It Takes, on the 1988 race.) The Biden whose advisers recently floated the patronizing idea of recruiting Stacey Abrams as his vice-presidential nominee — an idea quickly shot down by Abrams (“you don’t run for second”) — is of a piece with his hailing of Barack Obama as “articulate and bright and clean.” People don’t change.
On the heels of impressive fundraising and polling that puts him third among Democratic contenders, Pete Buttigieg seems to have launched himself into the top tier of candidates for the White House. How has he come so far so fast?
You don’t have to hear from me all that is appealing about this guy; the hagiographies are coming by the day. The biggest immediate threat to his candidacy may be overexposure too soon. His rise in the polls — he’s now No. 3 among Democrats, behind Biden and Bernie Sanders, in both Iowa and New Hampshire — is remarkable. His rising popularity may also express a dissatisfaction with the existing candidates, numerous and various as they are, and a certain press synergy with reporters who are products, as he is, of the well-educated upper-middle class. (That would include me.) That he is only 37 and the mayor of a (to be charitable) medium-sized city are not disqualifying in a country that has elevated a reality-television star known for fraud and bankruptcies to the Oval Office.
That he is gay is also a plus, I’d argue. Any American who refuses to consider a gay candidate for office is a locked-in Republican voter anyway. And not the least of Buttigieg’s skills is his ability to call out pious Republican bigots like Mike Pence, whom he branded the “cheerleader of the porn star presidency” for practicing a hypocritical bastardization of Christianity that aspires to relegate LGBTQ Americans to second-class citizenry. As both openly gay and openly Christian — and as a veteran of military service in Afghanistan — Buttigieg speaks with rare authority when he calls out the Taliban tendencies of Pence, who championed a Draconian “Religious Freedom” law as governor of Indiana and whose wife even now teaches at a school that bars gay students.
If there’s one thing that’s missing from our politics at this moment, it’s joy, and Buttigieg so far is offering that, along with his smarts and progressive convictions. He markets his views with wit and without rancor. His candidacy hasn’t even been officially declared yet — that may happen this weekend — and anything can and will happen. But for the moment let’s not look a gift dark horse in the mouth.
Frank Rich



Apr. 12, 2019
Herman Cain’s Fed Nomination Appears to Be Over Before Trump Even Made It

President Trump’s plan to turn the Federal Reserve Board into a right-wing-cable-show alumni society is hitting a snag as four Senate Republicans have signaled opposition to former presidential candidate Herman Cain, before any formal nomination has been made, according to the Washington Post:
As my colleague Jonathan Chait noted recently, there had already been reports that the White House might jettison Cain in order to save another equally unlikely Fed appointment, that of Stephen Moore:
The idea is that Republican senators might buck Trump on one nomination, but hardly two.
It’s possible this speculation is all wrong and that Trump will go to the mat for the former Godfather’s Pizza executive, who had an active career as a right-wing talk-radio gabber in Atlanta before he went national with a 2012 presidential campaign. Even if it fails, a fight over Cain would be a useful credential for Trump’s extremely slim claims of interest in promoting African-American representation in high federal offices.
More likely than not, though, Cain’s proto-nomination is toast; there are late-breaking reports that he will withdraw his candidacy for the post, relieving the president of the responsibility for pulling the plug.
We’ll now have to see if Trump follows up with another poorly qualified media figure, or lets Moore stand alone as a testament to his belief that talking on television is the only relevant qualification for any position, from president on down.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 12, 2019
Manchin Torments Democrats Some More With Endorsement of Susan Collins

West Virginia senator Joe Manchin unsurprisingly sees no particular reason to identify himself with the national Democratic Party while representing a state Donald Trump won with 68 percent of the vote in 2016 (the highest percentage in the country). But he’s administered two consecutive kicks in the teeth to the Donkey Party in recent weeks. Last Friday, Manchin acknowledged he’s thinking seriously about running for governor in 2020, which if he’s successful would very likely hand his Senate seat to the GOP. And now he has endorsed the 2020 reelection bid of his Republican colleague from Maine, Susan Collins. And it wasn’t just a pro forma endorsement, either, as Politico reports:
Democrats desperately want to knock off Collins next year. She is one of just two Senate Republicans up for reelection in 2020 who represents a state won by Hillary Clinton in 2016 (the other is Colorado’s Cory Gardner). And she damaged her traditional bipartisan base of support back home when she supplied the crucial vote to confirm Brett Kavanaugh for the Supreme Court despite her alleged pro-choice convictions. The backlash was strong enough to create a crowdsourced fund for a Collins challenger, which currently holds over $3.7 million (real money in Maine). Democrats haven’t identified a consensus challenger yet (one possibility, Obama national security adviser and ambassador to the U.N. Susan Rice, took herself out of consideration this week), but the odds are high this will be a close race.
With Democrats already suffering from a 53–47 deficit in the Senate, and Alabama Democrat Doug Jones being considered a likely casualty of Trump coattails in his state, a Democratic takeover of the Senate is beginning to look like an uphill fight, which is bad news for progressives no matter who wins the presidency. By potentially delivering one more Senate seat to the opposition, and helping them hold another, Joe Manchin is beginning to look like Mitch McConnell’s best friend. Whatever else it represents, it shows that Manchin has no interest in the national influence of the party under whose banner he has been running for office for 36 years. My colleague Sarah Jones is right: West Virginia Democrats need another strategy for regaining their mojo than continuing to depend on this extremely unreliable man.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 12, 2019
Trump’s War on Democracy: An Update

The Washington Post has an explosive report that the Trump administration directed the Department of Homeland Security to release immigrant detainees into “sanctuary cities,” including districts represented by Democratic leaders like Nancy Pelosi. This was not one of the bizarre, megalomaniacal schemes President Trump tends to dream up and rant about intermittently, but a pattern of concerted bureaucratic pressure. Trump tweeted a confirmation of this thinking on Friday:
That the effort failed allows us to read the story with two minds. On the one hand, we might conclude that the system worked: The department’s lawyers refused to endorse a transparently illegal scheme, and it has now been exposed in the media by a whistle-blower. On the other hand, the bureaucratic resistance to the administration’s demand was followed by a sweeping purge of the department, one specifically predicated on the refusal of its leadership to violate the law.
There is little mystery about Trump’s intent to turn the department into an unalloyed instrument of his agenda. So we are left wondering whether the danger has been thwarted, or whether it yet looms over our heads.
Trump’s election inspired a wave of concern, sometimes shading into outright panic, over the stability of the republic. It is fair to say that nothing has yet occurred that would irreversibly impair the democratic character of the state or entrench Trump and his allies in power. In this light, an increasingly smug wave of revisionism has taken hold. Shadi Hamid, writing in the Atlantic, scolds the intellectuals who wrung their hands over the possibility of democracy’s backsliding under Trump. He mocks the widespread attention to the book How Democracies Die — dismissing it as “an alarmist bible” — and, especially, the widespread use of Hitler analogies.
Of course, it has never made sense to consider the Nazis a historical analog to the party of Trump. While Trump may be an instinctive authoritarian who admires the control exerted by strongmen, unlike Hitler, he is not a social Darwinist bent on a genocidal war of territorial conquest. The worst-case scenario with Trump is not going to culminate in anything resembling totalitarian rule, industrialized murder, and global war.
Such stark, black-and-white terms have never been adequate for assessing the problem. The democracy literature, including How Democracies Die, is an attempt to frame the problem in less dramatic terms without downplaying its seriousness. One myth the authors are attempting to correct, without any apparent success on the part of critics like Hamid, is the popular habit of treating democracy in binary terms, with the alternatives being either an idealized republic or the rule of the most murderous totalitarians of the 20th century. The phrase “democratic backsliding” captures a messier reality in which autocracy moves along a continuum rather than suddenly descending in a parade of jackboots in the street. It involves the subversion of democratic norms and recruiting neutral government actors into agents of the regime’s political interests.
In recent days, the warning lights have flashed as bright as ever. Trump has ramped up the volume of his authoritarian rhetoric. This week alone, Trump has used “treasonous” as a description for both Democratic immigration policy (“I think what the Democrats are doing with the Border is TREASONOUS. Their Open Border mindset is putting our Country at risk”) and the Mueller investigation (“In fact, it was an illegal investigation that should never have been allowed to start. I fought back hard against this Phony & Treasonous Hoax!”).
Meanwhile, he is energetically subverting the independence of the Federal Reserve. The country’s economic health and the president’s standing are generally in alignment, but to the extent that they diverge, Trump wants to ensure that the Fed will prioritize the latter over the former. He has appointed a pair of flagrantly unqualified hacks to the board. “He wants guys he can call at home at night and tell them what he wants done,” a former administration official tells The Wall Street Journal.
The Senate appears predisposed to reject Herman Cain for a variety of idiosyncratic reasons, ranging from the numerous sexual harassment allegations against him to his association with a group that has challenged incumbent Republican senators. But Stephen Moore’s confirmation appears likely, and it would seem simple for Trump to appoint somebody just as pliant as Cain without the gratuitous disqualifying factors.
The Republican Senate recently mounted faint, ineffectual resistance to Trump’s plan to unilaterally redirect federal funds for a purpose Congress has rejected. And it has formed a solid wall of support behind Trump’s refusal to hand over his tax returns to Congress, despite both deep-rooted norms and law supporting the demand that he do so. This is in keeping with a broad Republican decision that Trump is entitled to run a personal business empire while holding office without disclosing the numerous avenues for corruption this arrangement opens up.
Also this week, Attorney General William Barr supplied fresh evidence he is carrying out the job the way Trump has always demanded: as a Roy Cohn figure committed to ignoring Trump’s misconduct while hounding his enemies. Barr announced he is investigating the possibility that the FBI was spying on the Trump campaign. The most likely explanation for what went on, and the one supported by all the known evidence, is that the FBI merely investigated figures associated with the Trump campaign who were connected with Russian intelligence, not the campaign itself. But Barr instead teased more nefarious explanations, even prejudging the outcome of his investigation. (“I think there was a failure among a group of leaders [at the FBI] at the upper echelon.”) And he attacked the FBI for allegedly failing to inform the Trump campaign of Russian infiltration, when in fact it did exactly that.
It is never easy to tell in the moment where all of this is going. Maybe Barr and other Republicans are patronizing the president, appearing to busily carry out his demands while actually delaying things and doing little. Or maybe Trump is actually figuring out how to get his hands into the gears of government and corrupt it as he sees fit.
The most dire outcomes do not have to be the most probable outcomes in order to legitimately command our attention. We know for sure that whatever Trump’s capabilities, the malevolence of his intentions lies beyond dispute. If Trump does win reelection — a prospect that is close to a coin-flip proposition under current economic conditions — that would place us now barely more than a quarter of the way through his presidency.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 12, 2019
For Democrats, Twitter Is Not Real Life. But It Could Be.

Democrats on Twitter are weirder than they appear. The small slice of blue America that’s visible on social media is much more ideological, progressive, white, college-educated — and, above all, interested in politics — than the Democratic coalition writ large.
Online, Ralph Northam’s youthful experimentation with blackface (and/or, Klan cosplay) self-evidently requires his resignation; the Democratic base is sick and tired of neoliberal triangulation; appealing to African-American voters means making the case for reparations; and “Mayor Pete” (and his love of Ulysses) are well-known throughout the nation. But an alternative political reality prevails in the churches, barbershops, union halls, and Panera Breads where extremely offline Democrats roam. A silent (or at least, non-posting) majority of Virginia Democrats wants Northam to stay in office. For the moment, the typical Democratic primary voter supports Joe Biden, the Third Way Democrat par excellence (unless Uncle Joe doesn’t run, in which case, they’ll take the democratic socialist). The typical black Democrat, meanwhile, prefers race-neutral wealth redistribution to reparations — and if you ask a group of normie Dems what they think of “Pete Boot-edge-edge,” they’ll be liable to think you’re having a stroke.
This week, the New York Times put a spotlight on these realities in a much-tweeted feature titled, “The Democratic Electorate on Twitter Is Not the Actual Democratic Electorate.” The piece, which draws on survey data from the (militantly moderate) More in Common project, serves as a corrective to punditry that mistakes the consensus views of Democrats on social media with those of the party’s base. And there’s much to be gained from dispensing with that false equivalence. The fact that Democratic voters are less “woke,” ideologically motivated, and attentive to the news cycle than they appear to be on social media has real implications in the upcoming primary fight. To name just one: Progressives who assume that Joe Biden’s many trips to the wrong side of history will inevitably condemn him to history’s dustbin are likely indulging in the pundit’s fallacy.
This said, if misinterpreted, the Times’ analysis could end up promoting its own fallacies. It is important to understand that progressives on Twitter are not representative of rank-and-file Democrats. But it’s equally important to remember that the major parties’ governing agendas aren’t set by their rank-and-file voters in popular referenda. Rather, each party’s priorities are shaped primarily by its political elites — which is to say, by its most influential elected officials, activists, donors, policy intellectuals, and interest-group leaders. Such partisan elites have never been representative of their “normie” allies. For this reason, if we want to assess the relevance of extremely online progressives in “real life” political outcomes, it isn’t enough to ask whether they’re representative of the Democratic electorate; we also need to know whether they speak for their party’s reigning elite.
It might be easier to appreciate all these points if we turn our gaze to the right. The Republican Party’s reigning elites are roughly as demographically and ideologically distinct from the broader GOP electorate as the online left is from the broader Democratic one. The attendees of Koch Network summits, members of Chambers of Commerce, segment producers of Fox News shows, and leaders of evangelical megachurches are more highly educated, ideological, and ideologically conservative than the Trumpian proletariat. And yet, this fact does not render the former’s views irrelevant to political outcomes in “the real world.” In fact, the preferences of conservative elites are much more relevant to such outcomes than those of ordinary Republicans.
This is true in two distinct senses. First, such elites are much more effective at imposing their will on the GOP because they have the time, money, and attention necessary to punish party officials who betray their preferences and reward those who do their bidding. Ordinary voters, by contrast, can’t afford to fund lobbying operations or make big-dollar donations as individuals — and do not (generally) have enough interest in politics to form organizations capable of funding such operations collectively. Thus, the median Republican has relatively little leverage over her party’s officeholders: In opinion polls, a majority of GOP voters actually oppose cutting taxes on the wealthy and corporations, support increasing federal spending on health care, and say that the Supreme Court should uphold Roe v. Wade. The Republican Party nevertheless treats cutting taxes on the rich, reducing health-care spending, and appointing anti-Roe judges to the judiciary as governing priorities — because this is what conservative elites prefer.
Secondly, the views of conservative elites are more significant than those of the typical GOP voter because, on many issues, the typical GOP voter will simply take dictation from her party’s elites. As the poll results cited above would suggest, rank-and-file Republican voters are a bit more likely to identify as “moderate” — and to express support for a heterodox mix of liberal and conservative policy positions — than their most politically engaged co-partisans. But in most cases, this moderation does not reflect a strong ideological commitment to center-right policies, so much as a lack of ideological commitment, in general. As political scientists Donald Kinder and Nathan Kalmoe (among others) have demonstrated, most voters view politics through the lens of identity, not ideology. Voters are born into families, religions, ethnic groups, regions, and economic classes — and most derive their partisan preferences from these social-group attachments. Relatively few care enough about politics to subscribe to any coherent philosophy of government. Thus, when asked to categorize themselves ideologically, many voters who have little use for such categories will identify as “moderate,” by default. Meanwhile, even self-identified conservatives tend to be partisans first, and ideologues second. Or as Kinder and Kalmoe write, “ideological identification seems more a reflection of political decisions than a cause.” In other words: The average conservative Republican doesn’t identify with the Republican Party because she is a conservative — she identifies with conservatism because she is a Republican.
This “ideological innocence” gives GOP elites leeway to define (and redefine) the “conservative” position on a wide variety of issues for ordinary Republican voters. In the mid-aughts, opinion polls showed that Republican voters were becoming increasingly concerned about climate change, and open to government action to address it. Then, as Harvard political scientist Theda Skocpol has documented, Fox News and other organs of the conservative media began ramping up their coverage of “the climate hoax” — and that polling trend abruptly reversed. By 2009, more than 60 percent of GOP voters were telling Gallup that global warming was exaggerated. This “follow the leader” phenomenon has been especially conspicuous in the Trump era, when the Republican Party’s most influential public-facing elite have forced the “conservative” faithful to radically redefine its orthodoxy on U.S. policy toward Putin’s Russia, the relevance of personal morality to an individual’s fitness for high office, and free trade.
To be sure, Trump’s success at revising these elements of GOP orthodoxy — like his success at winning the GOP nomination — shows that the ability of established elites to dictate terms to partisan voters is far from unlimited. And yet, it would be a mistake to read Trump’s ascension as a testament to the supremacy of ordinary voters in the Republican coalition. GOP elites aren’t a monolith. And immigration has long divided the party’s corporate funders from a segment of its ideological donors, activists, and media personalities. In this context of intra-elite conflict, the preferences of rank-and-file Republicans proved decisive. The old guard could neither make GOP primary voters care about Trump’s heresies on trade or universal health care, nor make them forgive Jeb Bush for his heretical softness on immigration. The party did not “decide.”
But the base didn’t decide by itself, either. Subsequent events have confirmed the central importance of the GOP’s nativist counter-elite to the 2016 revolt. As we’ve seen, immigration isn’t the only issue where elite conservative opinion is in tension with the intuitions of ordinary Republican voters. But since the GOP has no “welfare chauvinist” counter-elite, the party has made no effort to translate Trump’s populist (and popular) positions on health care, infrastructure, or drug prices into policy. And even with the support of nativist elites, GOP voters have been unable to force their party to implement their preferences on immigration: Despite the president’s best efforts, a unified Republican government declined to pass restrictions on legal immigration, or funding for a border wall during his first two years in office. In the end, on almost all issues of substantive import, Jeb Bush’s donors did decide.
All of these dynamics apply to the Democratic Party’s internal politics. A significant minority of Democratic voters harbor decidedly “non-woke” views on a variety of social issues. But these days, such voters’ preferences are almost entirely ignored in intra-party debates. This is because Team Blue’s social liberals aren’t merely more numerous, but also, better organized. NARAL has the resources to impose a cost on Democrats who work to curtail reproductive freedom; low-information Democratic voters who parrot right-wing talking points in conversations with pollsters do not. Meanwhile, on many issues, what the Democratic base will see as the “liberal” or “moderate” position is effectively dictated by elite signaling. When Barack Obama came out in favor of gay marriage, support for that civil right among black voters jumped from 41 to 59 percent. Finally, on those occasions when grassroots revolts stymie Democratic elites, it is generally because a counter-elite has effectively mobilized in opposition — as when labor unions and consumer groups defeated Obama’s push for the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
All of which is to say: Extremely-online Democrats don’t need to be representative of the broader Democratic electorate for their views to be of paramount importance. They just need to be representative of their party’s most powerful elites.
And in many cases, these categories overlap: Some of the most prominent Democrats on Twitter are members of Congress, Hill staffers, former White House officials, and leaders of party-aligned interest groups. That said, such partisan elites share space on social media with left-wing commentators, media personalities, unaligned activists, and political super-hobbyists whose prominence reflects their polemical gifts, not any ties to pillars of Democratic power. Such voices can wield some independent influence by winning the hearts and minds (and likes and retweets) of party elites, along with those of the small segment of hyper-engaged voters who follow politics on social media. But this is a very limited form of power; the progressive super-tweeter’s bark far exceeds her bite. So, unless left-wing ideologues and intellectuals are largely in step with the party’s genuine power players, their overrepresentation in social-media discourse will produce a skewed picture of elite Democratic opinion.
And unfortunately, online progressives are not perfectly representative of Democratic elites. Most significantly, corporate interest groups exert considerable influence on Democratic policy-making, but are almost entirely absent from the party’s online conversation. Major Wall Street banks do not advance their aims through memes or Twitter essays, but rather, through lobbying operations and campaign donations to business-friendly Democrats like New Jersey congressman Josh Gottheimer.
Progressives on Twitter are more liberal than the median Democratic voter. But that is not the primary constraint on the online left’s political relevance. After all, the biggest ideological gaps between progressive ideologues and rank-and-file Democrats lie on (so-called) social issues — and the ideologues have nevertheless made steady progress in turning their preferences on issues of reproductive freedom, LGBT rights, and immigration into party orthodoxy. Meanwhile, as indicated above, most of the Democratic Party’s self-professed moderates are non-ideological (as opposed to being ideologically committed to Third Wayism), and are willing to follow the lead of their party’s elites on a wide range of issues. In other words, the typical moderate Democratic voter does not share progressive Twitter’s ideological commitments — but she isn’t firmly opposed to them either.
When 17 Senate Democrats voted to loosen regulations on the financial industry last year — in defiance of the overwhelming consensus among Democratic tweeters — they did not do so at the behest of ordinary voters. Low-information, moderate Democrats (i.e., the kind who are underrepresented on Twitter) did not march on Washington chanting, “What do we want? To raise the asset threshold that qualifies banks for heightened risk management standards from $50 billion to $250 billion! When do we want it? Now!” Rather, this demand came from the executives of regional banks.
Similarly, just this week, congressional Democrats rallied behind a bill that would prohibit the IRS from providing all Americans with free tax-filing software, much to progressive Twitter’s chagrin. Of course, Nancy Pelosi’s caucus did not accept this provision because ordinary Democratic voters want our nation’s tax-filing process to be needlessly complex and costly. House Democrats did so because (among other reasons) the tax-preparation industry has invested heavily in many of their campaigns.
In sum, Democrats on Twitter are not representative of their party’s broader electorate, which is both less ideological and politically engaged, and therefore much more likely to forgive (or fail to notice) the ideological heresies of trusted partisan elites like Joe Biden. But this is not the most significant constraint on the political relevance of the progressive Twitterati; the power of Democratic Party-aligned corporate elites is. On the right, extremely online conservatives hold many views that contradict those of ordinary, politically disengaged Republican voters. But since upholding conservative ideological purity — and showing deference to corporate power — are compatible on most policy issues, the preferences of the right’s top tweeters are largely in sync with the governing priorities of their party. The left’s most prolific posters aren’t so lucky. And so, for Democrats, Twitter is “not real life.”
But someday, it could become awfully lifelike — if progressives ever find a way to evict the money-lenders from their party’s temple.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 11, 2019
Watch Fed Nominee Stephen Moore Get Surprised by His Own Support of the Gold Standard

The gold standard, the monetary system in which paper currency is backed by a shiny metal, was effectively abandoned in the United States in 1933, and officially dropped in 1971. Though markets featuring such a standard were known to be more volatile and more likely to suffer inflation, some conservative politicians and economists have flirted with the idea in recent years.
Among their ranks: Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, and Stephen Moore, who is one of President Trump’s nominees for the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors. But in an appearance on CNN on Thursday, Moore, an economist at the Heritage Foundation, quite confidently told host Erin Burnett that he had never supported a return to the gold standard. Then Burnett played the tape.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 11, 2019
Conservatives Are Pushing to Put One of Their Own in Charge of Homeland Security

The whole world understands that the recent sacking of key personnel at the Department of Homeland Security represented a presidential demand for a toughening of already-rough immigration policies. The competition to succeed defenestrated DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen may indicate exactly how vicious Trump and his trusted policy henchman Stephen Miller intend to get.
Naturally, Trump favorite Kris Kobach, who has some time on his hands after losing the 2018 gubernatorial election in Kansas, is in the mix. He boasts a dual commitment to exclusionary immigration policies and voter suppression that makes him especially congenial to the MAGA folk. But he may not be confirmable in the Senate.
And then there’s the possibility of a lateral transfer for Energy Secretary and former Texas governor Rick Perry, who has always been tough on border security, despite occasional squishiness (i.e., agreement with a majority of Americans) on other immigration issues, like treatment of Dreamers and other undocumented people already in the country.
A possible compromise between troglodyte Kobach and mere Visigoth Perry is emerging, though: Virginia’s former attorney general and conservative ideological warhorse Ken Cuccinelli.
Cucccinelli, who gained national attention as the failed Republican nominee for Governor of Virginia in 2013 (losing to Terry McAuliffe), is a hard-core immigration hawk, mainly as a corollary of his general determination to stake out the firmest and clearest conservative ground on everything. He was best known in Virginia as a right-wing culture warrior against legalized abortion and homosexuality. But he also battled climate science, tried to kill Obamacare, and on the issue most relevant to his current aspirations, he called for a constitutional convention to revoke birthright citizenship.
The Virginian’s big problem is that he was not an original Trump supporter; indeed, he was Ted Cruz’s chief delegate hunter before and during the 2016 Republican National Convention. But as Philip Wegmann of RealClearPolitics reports, Cuccinelli, like Cruz himself, has tried to make it all up to the warlord who conquered his party:
Cuccinelli is getting major backing from his long-time movement-conservative allies:
Those are some important friends to have. He also reportedly has the good fortune of being acceptable to both Stephen Miller and his sometimes-rival,  presidential son-in-law Jared Kushner.
Trump is also considering the appointment of a an “immigration czar” who gets to ride herd on administration officials who aren’t sufficiently zealous on the subject, without having to run the sprawling DHS. Cuccinelli’s on the short-list for that gig, too, if it materializes.
Any way you slice it, Cuccinelli is another symbol of the fusion of Trumpism with “movement conservatism,” and the extinction of “NeverTrump” ideological ultras. The turn to the right at DHS could help blur or even eliminate the old differences Cuccinelli embodied in 2016, once and for all.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 11, 2019
Mayor Pete Is Putting a Spotlight on the Prejudices of the Christian Right

Pete Buttigieg has already captured a lot more attention than you’d expect from the 37-year-old mayor of a small midwestern city mainly known for hosting big-time college football games. He is, for example, ranked third in a new poll on Democratic presidential candidates in New Hampshire by St. Anselm College. His candidacy could be for real.
But whether or not he winds up on a national ticket, his candidacy is already making history: Buttigieg is openly gay and an observant Christian, which together represent a serious challenge to the doctrinaire homophobia of the powerful Christian Right. The latter’s coalition of conservative evangelicals and traditionalist Catholics tend to be fans of the heathenish Donald Trump, as I recently noted:
On a more basic level, Buttigieg is exposing some beliefs about homosexuality that are (or at least ought to be) embarrassing to conservative Christians, which is probably why they don’t really talk much about why their faith compels them to discriminate. Here’s Mayor Pete throwing the disdain of such folk, including the vice president of the United States, back in their faces.
Pence refused to address the challenge, quoting some nice things Buttigieg said about his economic development program as governor of Indiana, their shared home-state. But deep down, he knows his national political profile is all about his Christian Right values, from his past championship of a law designed to sanction religious-based discrimination against LGBTQ folk in his state, to his current role as the conservative evangelical validator of Trump’s divinely ordained mission to bring back the 1950s.
The plain truth of the matter is that the homophobia of conservative Christians is based on the belief that being gay is a choice made in conscious defiance of God and nature. This once-dominant belief is losing credence every day as straight Americans get to know openly gay people as friends, family members, and compatriots in work and (where it’s allowed!) in worship. And as people begin to understand sexual orientation as something that isn’t voluntarily determined, the religious implication raised by Buttigieg becomes harder and harder to ignore: It’s precisely the conservative refusal to accept the work of the Creator that represents a defiance of God and nature.
If nothing else, Mayor Pete is smoking out the prejudices lurking beneath the banal assertions that Christians need government-sanctioned liberty to discriminate because their faith demands it. Is it really faith, or just a cultural bias based on scientific ignorance that happens — like a lot of sinful things — to have coexisted with religious belief and unbelief alike over the centuries?
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 11, 2019
Despite Huge Field, There Could Be an Early Knockout in 2020 Democratic Race

The emergence of a record-large (with 18 candidates and counting) Democratic presidential field, the absence of a dominant front-runner, and the Democratic Party’s proportional delegate award system have led many observers to suggest that the presidential nomination may not be decided until late in the process. Indeed, there’s talk of the possible reappearance of that presumed-to-be-extinct beast, the contested convention.
It could all play out that way, but as Kyle Kondik points out, there’s an alternative scenario that stems from the heavy front-loading of the 2020 primary calendar:
Indeed, as Kondik notes, fully 60 percent of pledged delegates will be awarded during a two-week period running from March 3 (generally known as Super Tuesday) through March 17, when primaries are scheduled in fully half the states (a share that could go even higher if late-deciding states like New York move into this window). Depending on what happens in the four February contests that are “protected” from additional competition by national party rules (Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina, in that order), this huge bloc of early-to-mid-March states could either produce scattered results that make an early decision impossible, or could instead make one candidate the putative (not official, but certain) nominee.
In one entirely plausible scenario, one of the early front-runners, Joe Biden or Bernie Sanders, wins both Iowa and New Hampshire. No candidate in either party who pulled off that stunt since Iowa emerged as a major nominating-contest state in the 1970s has failed to win the nomination. Conversely, Bill Clinton in 1992 is the only candidate to lose both states and go on to win the nomination, and that anomaly deserves an asterisk because favorite son Tom Harkin took Iowa off the table that year. In another “early knockout” scenario, Kamala Harris does surprisingly well in Iowa, better in Nevada, consolidates the African-American vote to win South Carolina, and then wins big in her home state of California and in southern states with South Carolina–like demographics (six states of the former Confederacy are holding primaries on the same day as California, March 3). Particularly since Harris has “unity candidate” characteristics, she would be hard to stop at that juncture.
However, the March primaries are sufficiently diverse — geographically, demographically, and ideologically — to enable multiple candidates to survive with skill, luck, and money. The only region significantly under-represented in the early going is the Mid-Atlantic (though again, New York could yet move its primary to March).
Whether or not there’s an early knockout, the field will almost certainly be significantly winnowed by March. While Democrats do insist generally on proportional delegate awards (i.e., they ban the kind of winner-take-all contests that helped Donald Trump nail down the GOP nomination in 2016), a major qualification is the 15 percent threshold for winning any delegates at either the statewide or congressional-district level. The same huge field that may keep down popular vote and delegate percentages for those at the top will almost certainly deny delegates to many at the bottom, which means a lot of candidates could drop out before the snows melt as the vital oxygen of money and media vanishes.
And as Kondik reminds us, the winnowing will likely begin before voters vote at all:
By late this year, candidates who are struggling in the February 2020 states will probably look ahead to that vast and insanely expensive array of March states and despair. That’s one reason the June and July debates may be such a big deal: It’s a rare and cost-effective opportunity for candidates caught in the scrum to put a bullet next to their names (as Beto O’Rourke briefly did late last year and Pete Buttigieg seems to be doing right now) and achieve an otherwise unlikely viability. The period in which they can all dream of claiming victory in Milwaukee in July 2020, however, won’t last much longer.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 11, 2019
So What If Bernie Sanders Is a Millionaire?

As President Trump keeps fighting to keep his tax returns secret, several Democrats hoping to challenge him in 2020 — including Kirsten Gillibrand, Jay Inslee, Amy Klobuchar, and Elizabeth Warren — have already released several years worth of tax returns. Soon, Bernie Sanders will join them.
Sanders’s campaign manager, Faiz Shakir, told CNN on Wednesday that they will release ten years of returns by April 15, the deadline for filing taxes. Though we don’t know the broader story they’ll tell about Sanders’s finances, one point has already drawn a lot of attention: Sanders has become a millionaire since his first presidential run in 2015. The candidate confirmed his financial status in an interview with the New York Times on Tuesday. “I wrote a best-selling book,” he said. “If you write a best-selling book, you can be a millionaire, too.”
Shakir told CNN that the candidate still “believes in opportunity for all, and the fact that he is somebody who has personally benefited from that opportunity is something that he feels should be a shared opportunity with everyone else. He’s made some money off a book. And I think that the opportunity that he has had is evaporating for so many others. He feels that strongly.”
Unsurprisingly, Sanders still received some flak for his millionaire status. “Bernie is lucky to live in a capitalist society,” CNN’s Erin Burnett remarked on a Tuesday episode of her show. “It’s all very off-brand and embarrassing, but Senator Bernie Sanders is a millionaire,” announced one ThinkProgress piece. But alleging that Sanders’s wealth makes him a hypocrite relies on a misunderstanding of his political views, and at the same time, obscures the real red flag his tax-return saga raises.
Candidates should publish their tax returns as a matter of principle (and except for Trump, every presidential candidate has, dating back to Richard Nixon). That goes double for a candidate like Sanders, who is running as a champion of working people. Until it’s easier for working-class people to run for public office, chances are high that a presidential candidate will be richer than the average voter. By revealing the sources and extent of their wealth, candidates at least make themselves more accountable to voters. Trump, for example, ran for office not just as a populist focused on the concerns of white workers, but as a successful businessman. There’s reason to believe his tax returns would contradict that claim, and even reveal the extent of his corruption — information that might have shifted voters’ views. Warren ably summarized the argument on Wednesday. “I’ve put out eleven years of my tax returns because no one should ever have to guess who their elected officials are working for,” she told CNBC. “Doing this should be law.”
If Sanders is a hypocrite, it’s for delaying the release of his tax returns. The size of his bank account has nothing to do with it. A person can criticize capitalism, or even categorically oppose capitalism, despite being wealthy. Left-wing movements always have their class traitors, as any college freshman who is passingly familiar with Friedrich Engels could remind us. In a similar vein, socialism’s antagonists haven’t updated their arguments much over the last century or so. Leftists have frequently been accused of either lusting for other people’s money, or betraying their own cause because they do not live in cardboard boxes. Sanders has been subjected to similar attacks for years. “Bernie Sanders slams billionaires, gets reminded he owns 3 houses,” the Washington Examiner trumpeted in 2017. “Socialist Bernie Sanders Wears a $700 Jacket While Complaining About Rich People,” Newsweek jabbed a year later. (The jacket happened to be a gift.)
Sanders does not appear to be an anti-capitalist in the strictest sense — his brand of social democracy is compatible with capitalism, even as it seeks to regulate it and loosen its grip on the American worker — but even if he were, his wealth wouldn’t make him a fraud. Socialism does not demand asceticism. As the old labor slogan says, workers need bread and roses, too — small luxuries that make life more tolerable. The point isn’t to accumulate excess, but to elevate the human dignity of the worker — a radical shift from the current the political reality. When the U.S. government does offer help to low-income people, it typically does so under punitive conditions. People who need welfare have to prove they’re looking for work, as if they’re lazy bums who must be goaded into productivity. Similarly, there’s no real financial reason for the Women, Infants, and Children food aid program to ban beneficiaries from purchasing herbs or spices, but it does. One F-35 fighter jet can buy a lot of dried basil, and only one of these items works as advertised on a regular basis. (It’s not the jet.) The government could improve the material circumstances of vulnerable Americans with relative ease, if it chose to do so — that’s the core argument Sanders, and like-minded politicians, have put forward.
So Sanders owns too many roses. If he suddenly promoted Trump’s tax cuts, his detractors would be right to call him a hypocrite. The proof is in his policy. Sanders should have released his tax returns long ago. But whatever his faults, he is no Smaug, defending his horde from all comers. He has repeatedly endorsed higher taxes on wealth to fund an expansion of the welfare state, and though he isn’t the only Democratic candidate to do so, his consistency is a point in his favor. His recent wealth may even make him more credible to voters as he offers it up in the name of progress. Even as a millionaire, Sanders stands in sharp contrast to Trump.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 11, 2019
White Deputy’s Son Arrested for Black Church Arsons in Louisiana

Three black churches were intentionally set ablaze in St. Landry Parish, Louisiana, over the course of ten days in late March and early April. Police on Wednesday arrested a suspect: Holden Matthews, a 21-year-old white man and the son of a local sheriff’s deputy. Whether racism motivated the arsons remains to be determined, but the possibility has gripped black residents in a state of fear, according to reports.
The attacks marked the latest in a string of such incidents across the Southern United States going back decades. Perhaps the most infamous was the Ku Klux Klan bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963. Four young girls were killed. Dylann Roof’s murder of nine black parishioners at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston in South Carolina in 2015 was similarly bookended by an arson of the same church, which was co-founded by slave-revolt leader Denmark Vesey, by vengeful whites in 1822. And the week after Roof’s attack saw several more black churches burned down, including at least three — in Tennessee, Georgia, and North Carolina — that were ruled arsons but did not result in arrests.
The Louisiana fires allegedly set by Matthews consumed the St. Mary Baptist Church in Port Barre on March 26, and the Greater Union and Mount Pleasant Baptist Churches, both in Opelousas, on April 2 and April 4 respectively. Black churches have been targeted for racist violence throughout history because they were seen as sites where black community was built and resistance to white supremacy was fomented. “Across the diaspora, black spiritual and religious spaces — whether a clearing in the woods or a stone and mortar church — have nurtured rebellion, and that’s why they continue to be under siege,” J.T. Roane, an assistant professor of Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies at the University of Cincinnati who studies religion and black communities, said in 2015.
Speculation surrounding Matthews’s motives has ranged from the logical — racist violence — to the hysterical, as with CNN’s report that he may have been influenced by “black metal” music. Whatever the impetus, the 21-year-old is charged with three counts of arson of a religious building, each of which carries a maximum penalty of 15 years in prison. Nobody was physically harmed in the fires. And despite the emotional toll, parishioners wasted no time returning to worship. “[They] didn’t destroy the church, they destroyed the building,” Reverend Gerald Touissant of Mount Pleasant Baptist told local KATC.com. According to the outlet, members of the two Opelousas congregations worshipped with other local churches on the first Sunday after their chapels burned down. “It steals something from you, it robs you but then … right now is the time to find something to pick them up,” added Touissant.
Black Christian faith has never been cowed by such attacks, but that has not diminished their threat. HuffPost in 2015 estimated that, since 1956, more than 90 black American churches have been targeted for bombings, arsons, or vandalism meant to intimidate their congregants and broader communities. Nor were these assaults limited to the Jim Crow era, when black political organizing — often based in Southern black churches — threatened for the first time in decades to upend the racist status quo. Dozens occurred in the 1990s. At least ten have occurred since 2004. Echoes of Roof’s attack in 2015 reverberated into 2018, when Gregory Bush, who is charged with shooting and killing two black seniors at a Louisville, Kentucky supermarket, began his attack by attempting to break into a black church nearby. The doors were locked, fortunately for the congregants. A witness saw Bush yanking at them aggressively, trying to enter. He soon moved on and killed elsewhere. The security measures may have worked in this instance, but as has been demonstrated, safety for black churches remains as precarious as it is for black people.
Zak Cheney-Rice



Apr. 11, 2019
Trump May Freak Out Florida With Green Light for Offshore Drilling

As a generally (and consistently) unpopular president, Donald Trump often says and does things that offend public opinion. Usually, however, he does so with a political strategy in mind, such as keeping his culture-war–crazy base fully energized.
On occasion, though, a combination of Trumpian impulses seems to carry him into positions that just don’t make sense politically. It’s possible that his mania for oil and gas production, his deep investment in economic growth regardless of the environmental consequences, and his love for riling up liberals could convince him to do something that will significantly complicate his 2020 reelection bid, as Politico explains:
You may recall that early last year, then-Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke very publicly assured Florida governor Rick Scott, then entering a tough Senate race he ultimately won by an eyelash, that the Sunshine State would be exempt from any plan to auction off offshore drilling licenses. Now Politico tells us the president himself was annoyed by Zinke’s action, and could reverse it assuming (as is likely the case) industry-chummy Interior staff recommend that course of action. Nothing is likely to happen until Senate confirmation of new Interior secretary David Bernhardt, but then things could get weird.
More particularly, now-senator Scott still wants Florida left out of any offshore drilling plan, and he’s hardly alone among local Republicans:
Totally aside from stabbing his allies in the back, a Trump flip-flop on offshore drilling would really imperil his ability to carry Florida in 2020, a state he won in 2016 by just over a single percentage point (carrying all but one Gulf Coast county). And it’s really tough to sketch out a path to 270 electoral votes for Trump without this state’s 29 (more than Michigan and Wisconsin combined). I’m sure he’d hate to disappoint his friends in the fossil fuel industries, but it may prove necessary to Keeping America Great.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 11, 2019
The King of Children’s Music Takes on Trump

The subgenre of “children’s music” can be pretty barren lyrically, a wasteland of dada earworms, nonsense lullabies, nursery rhymes, and edutainment. It is not generally considered fertile ground for discussing political and social issues. But a quick journey into Spotify proves that these songs have the power to inform a fledgling’s belief system. There’s Christian kids’ music (“Jonah was a Prophet” honestly slaps … and I’m Jewish). Sweet Honey in the Rock is a black gospel a capella group that is popular among the 10-and-under set. Their arrangement of “This Train Is Bound for Glory,” a spiritual once made famous by Sister Rosetta Tharpe, makes me tear up. It’s also not typical children’s music. There have been some notable indie efforts but they are overshadowed by unrelenting trash heaps like last year’s viral sensation, “Baby Shark.”
And, eureka! In a league onto himself, is Raffi.
If you grew up in the ’80s and ’90s, have children, or have ever been to a kid’s birthday party, then you’ve probably heard the Canadian crooner’s timeless bangers “Baby Beluga” and “Banana Phone.”
Raffi’s saccharine melodies and lyrics actually read like discrete guides on how to live and love with dignity, starting at childhood. With an adult’s ear, the chorus of Raffi’s biggest hit — “Baby beluga in the deep blue sea / Swim so wild and you swim so free” — appears to be about learning how to individuate while still feeling safe and held by your caretakers. It’s a valuable message, even for adults. The last line of “Everything Grows,” an ode to the universality of the life cycle, is, “Mamas do and papas too / everything grows.” It’s a subtle reminder to parents that while we may be done with the physical part of our growth, emotional growth is a lifelong journey.
But learning to live with dignity means learning about what it’s like to live without it and the nefarious forces that try to take it away. “Apathy is the enemy of democracy. And through apathy, tyrants can gain power,” Raffi said to me about why he’s been so vocal about Trump in a recent interview. But if you look closely, these messages have been in his music forever. “And I need some clean water for drinking / And I need some clean air for breathing / So that I can grow up strong,” he wrote in his 1979 hit “All I Really Need.” The lyrics resonate like an anthem for basic human rights, rights that are still unfortunately being fought for 40 years later. Like many of his songs, it is a blueprint for human kindness in its most pure, essential form.
In recent months, the 70-year-old singer has gained a bit of attention for his active, politically engaged Twitter feed where many posts are accompanied with the dissenter’s slogan du jour: #Resist and #ResistFacism. Raffi’s outspokenness around Trump and his policies goes back to when he was elected. Just last week the singer called Trump unfit for office, racist, and misogynistic. In December he said we must “fight fascism with everything we’ve got.” Seemingly trite, the addition of Raffi’s voice to the American political landscape is actually invaluable — the singer-songwriter is the premier emissary for children and his positions carry with them an incredible weight. And the children, after all, are the future.
Recently I spoke to him about the nexus between children’s music, politics, and human decency. Raffi is not quiet about his opinions. But, he rejects the label “political” being affixed either to his personal outspokenness or music, though he has songs that tackle issues like climate change, peace between Israelis and Palestinians, and most recently, his love of Bernie Sanders. (By the way, Bernie, if you’re reading this Raffi “wishes you well” this time around and said it’d be “interesting” if you asked him to sing his song “Wave of Democracy” at your upcoming rallies).
He seems to view being political as artificial, an act of external performance: He’s as taken aback by the idea that he is political as he would be if I’d called him a politician. “Maybe just like the troubadour that I am, I seek creative ways of self-expression,” he told me. “I seek the right [to] expound about who I am the way that I feel that I am,” he said when pressed about his unwillingness to be labeled political. “It’s not a big deal to me. I don’t go around having debates in my head as to whether I’m political or not. I just have a way of speaking, I just have a way of presenting what I’m passionate about. That’s what I do” he said.
But a few moments later he spoke about treating climate change as an emergency, saying, “Unless a rapid shift to a low-carbon economy happens like yesterday, you’re gonna face a very, very tough world.” It’s easy to dismiss the way Raffi couches his activism as a cop-out, as a way to insulate himself from accountability. But the singer doesn’t hide his beliefs; they’re always there in his music and on his social media profiles for everyone to see. Admittedly, I always thought identifying as “not political” seemed like a privilege. But there is something I’m finding in Raffi’s fine print: You can hold a unique space in the political landscape when you insist that your political positions aren’t political at all, but borne out of self-evident, universal values.
Raffi has a way of both challenging an idea while simultaneously distilling it, as he does when we talk about climate change. “I detest the term ‘the environment,’ I think it’s barren and cold. I never use it. Never,” he said. “It’s different if you say, ‘our environment,’ perhaps. There can be many environments that you live in. There’s a learning environment, there’s a family environment and all of that. Mother Nature, or simply Nature, is that planetary community that we live in. It’s the basis of our lives. It’s what feeds us. We come from the womb and suddenly we’re in a womb with a view. Mother Nature.” On Twitter, he took a more political approach when he predicted World War III would be “climate change: humanity’s war on itself.”
Raffi Cavoukian is an immigrant two times over. Born to Armenian parents who had escaped the genocide, the singer, 70, spent his first ten years in Egypt. At ten, his father moved their family to Toronto. Of immigrating to a new country he said, “You learn to forgive. You learn to be strong in your identity. And even while you’re learning a whole new culture; so quite the transition.” In early March Raffi tweeted, “blame the inciter in chief…how’s that for false patriotism,” in response to an article posted by Chelsea Clinton with the headline, “Counties that hosted a 2016 Trump rally saw a 226 percent increase in hate crimes.” With me he took his big-stick approach. “Children are people,” he said about child separation. “The reason we don’t want corporeal punishment, let alone separation from their families, is that you don’t hit people. It’s not okay to hit people. Children are people, so we don’t hit them. By the same token, you know, if you respect children as people, you don’t separate them from your families.” It’s a simple statement, a seemingly unremarkable one. But if you were to put Raffi’s words to a tune, it’d be a heartfelt children’s song, there to teach us how to treat each other. And it reveals more yet about Raffi’s belief that children should be considered as whole and serious human beings.
Raffi’s attempt to have it both ways — be political, yet be thought of as apolitical — is working for him. The singer, whose first album came out in 1975, says he has no plans to retire. He will continue to tour with his children’s music but is also focused on his foundation, the Raffi Foundation, which promotes a group of principles he came up with about how to advance children’s rights, called “Child Honouring.” “It’s one thing to be loved but it’s another thing entirely to feel respected for who you feel you are, and that is why the first word of the nine principles of Child Honouring is respectful so that principle — respectful love — that’s why that word is there,” he said. “It can’t be any kind of love. Sure, the Beatles sang ‘All You Need Is Love,’ but it can’t be a coercive love, it can’t be an overbearing love.”
At the end of our conversation I ask him what words he has to impart to youth living under Trump’s policies. Unsurprisingly, he brings it back to the spirit of his music. “Well it’s advice I’ve given many times in songs,” he said. “I suppose I can say, love is the greatest power you hold. Come to know that power, don’t let anyone take it away from you, hatred is not who human beings are, it’s not who we are. It’s an aberration; power of human spirit is a loving, caring spirit. That’s what it means to be human, so anybody’s task is to grow strong and to be rooted in that human capacity to love.”
When you’re fighting your way through the sludgiest sociopolitical turmoil of your lifetime, it can be hard to remember your values, or even what you’re fighting for. Raffi reminded me, over and over again, that care for the earth, for democracy, for human decency is pretty much paramount if we want to even have a future. I guess sometimes you need a children’s singer to remind you what’s important.
Collier Meyerson



Apr. 11, 2019
Memo Refutes Betsy DeVos’s Claim She Couldn’t Ban Use of Federal Funds to Buy Guns for Schools

In May 2018, a superintendent in rural Oklahoma requested to use federal grant money for firearms training, sparking a debate over whether or not the Education Department could block such a move. Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos claimed she was forced to stay neutral, writing in a letter to the House Education Committee that she would not bar states from using federal funds to purchase guns or gun training for schools. “Congress did not authorize me or the Department to make those decisions,” DeVos wrote, adding that she would not “legislate via fiat from the Department.”
Legislating by fiat, as it turns out, would have been unnecessary. According to an internal, 14-page Education Department memo released by House Democrats on Wednesday, DeVos did have the power to halt states from buying firearms for school districts. “The Department’s Office of the General Counsel has advised that the Secretary has discretion to interpret the broad language of the statute as to its permissiveness regarding the purchase of firearms and training on the use of firearms,” says the July 2018 memo.
Written by Jason Botel, a Trump appointee to the Department, the memo proposed a “compromise” in which the Department would allow federal grants to be “used to train school staff on the use of guns,” but stopped short of letting the funds be used for firearm purchases. The compromise would “support one necessary component of arming school staff but not expose the Department to the political liability were the funds to be allowed to purchase the weapons themselves.” But as Politico notes, an Education staffer appears to have checked off the most permissive allowance on gun sales:
Representative Jahana Hayes, a former teacher, discussed the document with DeVos, asking why she did not weigh into the debate last summer over arming teachers in Texas and Oklahoma. “In light of the contents of this memo, you have the ability to make a decision,” Hayes told DeVos. “Your silence is a decision. You have the authority to say that we cannot use federal funds to arm teachers.”
Hayes then asked DeVos if she would use that authority to block future use of federal funds to buy guns for schools. DeVos balked, answering that, “This is a matter for states and local communities,” and that, “Congress has the authority to make that action.”
DeVos — who once said guns might have a place in rural schools to protect student “from potential grizzlies” — has had a tough few weeks of testimony in front of the House. In her Wednesday appearance before the House Education Committee, DeVos also told lawmakers that she is “not familiar” with the affirmative action guidelines for schools that the administration got rid of last summer, or the Supreme Court case off which those rules were based.
In March, DeVos appeared before the House Appropriations subcommittee on education, where she was forced to answer why the Education Department intended to cut $8.5 billion from its budget, including a very high-profile attempt to revoke all federal funding for the Special Olympics. These appearances, to the detriment of the Education secretary, reaffirm the value of a House controlled by the opposition party: All of DeVos’s recent gaffes in front of lawmakers have been during her first appearances in front of the House since Democrats regained control of the chamber.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 10, 2019
Ex-Obama Counsel Gregory Craig Expects to Be Charged in Case Stemming From Mueller Investigation

Attorneys for former Obama White House counsel Gregory B. Craig told reporters on Wednesday that the lawyer anticipates he will soon face federal charges for some of the legal work he did for the government of Ukraine in 2012 and for subsequently failing to register as a foreign agent.
The case, initiated during the investigation led by special counsel Robert Mueller, relates to Craig’s time working for the white-shoe D.C. law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. In 2012, Craig was hired by the Justice Ministry of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych to review the prosecution of a political rival. According to the Ukrainian government, Skadden was paid $12,000 for the work, but prosecutors reportedly have said that Paul Manafort helped route over $4 million to the law firm via an offshore account.
Last September, the special counsel’s office transferred Craig’s case over to prosecutors in D.C., where Craig’s attorneys expect he will be indicted at the request of the Justice Department’s National Security Division.
In 2018, a different Skadden lawyer, Alex van der Zwaan, pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about his work on a report on Viktor Yanukovych’s rival and served 30 days in prison. Van der Zwaan allegedly handed a copy of the opposition research to Paul Manafort to help him lobby for Yanukovych and later deleted emails linking the two. But van der Zwaan is Dutch, and did not serve in the Obama administration, making the likely indictment of a former White House counsel a major political victory for President Trump and Attorney General William Barr, as the AG prepares a counter-investigation into the formation of the special counsel.
Matt Stieb







Apr. 10, 2019
Shunned by the Usual D.C. Circles, Trump Staffers Made Their Own Social Club

Just 4 percent of Washington, D.C.’s vote went to the Republican candidate last election, so it’s no surprise that President Trump’s staffers are having a hard time making friends in the District. “Instead of folks looking outward, more folks look inward,” a White House aide told Politico last summer, in a report on the toils of social life for the younger members of Trump’s staff living in, and attempting to date in, hostile territory.
Used to dealing with much more substantial crises, the team has figured out a solution. According to a new report from Politico, Trump staffers have founded the “45 Club,” a private group reserved for Trump’s current and former staff, as well as alumni of the campaign, the transition, and the inaugural committee. Members of the 45 Club, also known as “the Team,” wear a lapel pin that looks like a .45-caliber bullet casing. It is unclear if the president is aware of the club’s existence.
Co-founded by Paul Gates, the brother of Manafort underling and convicted felon Rick Gates, the club meets at faux-vintage diners, the Morton’s near the White House, and the Capital Yacht Club in the Wharf, a recently manufactured neighborhood “mostly devoid of true locals” that is popular with Trump staffers. Though attendance has waned since the rough-and-tumble first days of the administration, White House staff still seem to appreciate the opportunity to be among those with similar political views — even if they’re effectively their co-workers. “It’s like being a Yankee in Yankee Stadium,” former communications director Anthony Scaramucci told Politico. “When I’m on CNN, it’s like being a Yankee in Fenway Park.”
Though Trump’s status as a true political outsider is dubious, it appears that his staff is suffering the consequences of that reputation. According to Politico:
“When you’ve kept the Washington Illuminati at a distance, I think you’re more likely to form groups of your own,” one 45 Club member told Politico.
Not all Trump staffers are members of the club, nor are they all into it. “Ironically enough, the two guys who started it were never on the campaign, never in the administration,” said Kevin Chmielewski, a member of the campaign advance team who later worked at the EPA. “We were all kind of pissed about it, because it’s like, ‘Who are you to do that?’”
The 45 Club is a more exclusive example of the phenomenon of young Trump supporters organizing to meet with like-minded individuals, or at least to avoid public shaming. There’s 63red, known as the Yelp for the MAGA crowd, where users can search for restaurants where they can wear red hats and not get yelled at. And there are at least four dating sites for Trump supporters — TrumpSingles, Righter, Donald Daters, and Trump.Dating — the last of which used the image of a user who is a sex offender in its ads.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 10, 2019
Bernie Sanders Can Still Set Himself Apart on Medicare for All

On Wednesday, nearly four years after launching his first unlikely presidential campaign, Senator Bernie Sanders unveiled a new version of one of his signature proposals: Medicare for All. The bill, which has 14 co-sponsors, outlines a universal, government-run healthcare program that would cover hospital care and preventative services, as well as dental and vision services. It would end employer-provided insurance plans, but the Veterans Health Administration and the Indian Health Services would continue to exist as stand-alone, government-run systems, according to Vox. Americans could still choose their own physicians.
Overall, the plan differs little from Sanders’s previous M4A legislation, with one notable exception: It adds a long-term care benefit, which would cover at-home care for people with disabilities. In this respect, it resembles the House version of the M4A introduced by Representative Pramila Jayapal in February.
The overlap illustrates a recurring concern about Sanders’s second presidential bid: that he’ll be a victim of his own success. Though Medicare for All did not originate with Sanders, the senator took it mainstream during his 2016 presidential campaign, and he owes his national profile in part to its popularity. This time, however, Medicare for All isn’t a fringe idea, and Sanders isn’t a fringe candidate, but a frontrunner. His policy positions — including Medicare for All — gained Democratic supporters over the last few years, and they’ve proven to be unexpectedly durable. Now several Democratic 2020 candidates are running on Medicare for All. In fact, four of them — Senators Cory Booker, Kirsten Gillibrand, Kamala Harris, and Elizabeth Warren — co-sponsored Wednesday’s bill. In theory, that could make it difficult for Sanders to distinguish himself from other leading candidates.
Since Sanders has already set the tone of the Democratic primary, on health-care policy, at least, the question now is whether he can set the pace — whether his more immediate vision of change will win out over incrementalist alternatives. Democrats who say they support Medicare for All in principle often favor less generous versions of it in practice; as CNN notes, the candidates who co-sponsored the legislation have all signaled their willingness to consider compromise options. Booker, in a radio interview on Wednesday, described Medicare for All as an “ideal” and said that, while he thinks that the “best way” to ensure public access to affordable health care would be to design a Medicare for All system, “anybody who says those words ‘Medicare for All’ who’s running for president, the next thing out of their mouth should be talking to people about, in a split Congress, what are you going to do in your first year to make healthcare more accessible and affordable?”
Sanders does have some advantages over Booker and other candidates who are open to more incremental health care reform. First, his public image is so linked to M4A that voters may be inclined to trust his approach over others’ policy proposals. Second, the problems with maintaining America’s privatized system are vividly, and often painfully, apparent. Americans are rationing insulin because of the expense. Even having a healthy childbirth can be a luxury. As Axios reported, the U.S. is the most expensive nation in the world in which to give birth; the cost is much lower in nations with a version of single-payer healthcare in place. In such dramatically unequal circumstances, voters may see the urgency of Sanders’s healthcare vision as a necessity, not merely an ideal.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 10, 2019
Texas Bill Would Make Abortion Punishable by the Death Penalty

Generally speaking, I don’t pay much attention to crazy bills sponsored by random wingnut state legislators. But because it secured an extensive hearing in an important state’s legislature, I will make an exception for the Texas bill introduced by Republican State Representative Tony Tinderholt that would make abortion a criminal act of homicide, as explained by Andrea Gonzáles-Ramirez:
This last part is probably the least radical aspect of Tinderholt’s bill (which, in a nod to the meme comparing abortion to slavery, he dubbed the Abolition of Abortion Act) insofar as legislation challenging or defying Roe is being enacted in Republican-controlled legislatures all over the country (including Texas). This bill is best understood as representing the logical end of the strong belief in Right-to-Life circles that a fetus, and even an embryo, are indistinguishable metaphysically, and should be indistinguishable legally, from adult human beings — including very specifically the pregnant women involved. Indeed, as supporters of the bill have pointed out, it reflects the Texas GOP’s party platform, notes the Dallas Morning News:
There’s talk of sanctioning the Republican committee chairman who held the hearing on Tinderholt’s bill if he keeps it from appearing on the House floor (the same chairman co-sponsored an earlier version of the bill, so his determination on this score could waiver).
The Abolition of Abortion Act has split the anti-abortion lobby in Texas for the very good reason that many of RTL-ers fear it would scandalize voters (and mobilize women) at a time when every effort is being made to claim that it’s pro-choice folk who are the extremists on the subject. You may recall the trouble Donald Trump got into in 2016 when he naively said that women should face some form of punishment for violating abortion bans once they are enacted. That’s a tactical no-no, traditionally.
But Tinderholt’s allies don’t really care, as the Washington Post observes:
Some might say being compelled to carry an unwanted and/or dangerous pregnancy to term is punishment enough for women who have had the right to an abortion in most circumstances over the last 46 years.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 10, 2019
Republicans Prove Ilhan Omar Is Right About Anti-Muslim Bigotry

Representative Ilhan Omar made some anodyne remarks about discrimination targeting Muslims this week. In a speech she gave to a group fighting against anti-Muslim discrimination, she noted that the actions of a few people caused a backlash against the American Muslim community as a whole.
Republican Representative Dan Crenshaw of Texas waxed indignant, pretending Omar was downplaying the attacks:
Fox & Friends host Brian Kilmeade mused, “You have to wonder if she is an American first”:
Crenshaw and Kilmeade are obviously underscoring the very bigotry Omar was taking note of in the first place. And if you’re missing the irony of Kilmeade’s slander, recall that Omar created a firestorm among both parties by questioning the loyalty of American supporters of Israel. But the level of offensiveness she evinced that one time — and for which she was justifiably rebuked — is exceeded by leading Republicans on a near-daily basis.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 10, 2019
California Is a Golden Opportunity — and Challenge — for Kamala Harris in 2020

It’s been obvious for a while that California’s decision to move its presidential primary up to March 3, soon after the four protected early contests in Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina, could have as large an impact on the 2020 Democratic presidential nominating contest  as the state’s size. That’s not just because of the vast number of delegates that will be at stake; the state’s heavy voting-by-mail tendencies mean the contest in California will really begin much earlier, as my colleague Gabriel Debenedetti has pointed out:
California’s calendar shake-up is particularly important to the promising campaign of its junior Senator Kamala Harris (and presumably to Bay Area congressman Eric Swalwell, too, if he has any hopes of transcending his current obscurity to become a viable candidate). It offers her a potential early delegate lead, but also could be a fatal stumbling block if she does not do well there. And that’s why the first major 2020 presidential primary poll from the state, released by Quinnipiac, is interesting: It shows Harris running third with 17 percent, a point behind Bernie Sanders and nine points behind Joe Biden. No other candidate is even close to double-digits, though Elizabeth Warren and Pete Buttigieg are tied at fourth place with seven percent. Harris’s support is spread pretty evenly among demographic groups (she actually runs ahead of Bernie Sanders among self-identified “very liberal” voters, which is interesting given the issues some progressive activists have had with her record as a prosecutor).
Harris’s effort to become California’s favorite-daughter candidate in 2020 has a ways to go. She has done quite well in obtaining early endorsements from the state’s elected officials, as Politico noted in February:
But having only been elected to the Senate in 2016, Harris has soft public support and less than complete name identification. A fourth-quarter 2018 Morning Consult poll showed 29 percent of Californians as unable to give her a job-approval rating. A February 2019 Quinnipiac poll of California looked better, with only 16 percent falling into the clueless-about-Harris category; her overall approval ratio was a good-if-not-great 53/32 (80/7 among Democrats). And as the new Q-poll indicates, Biden and Sanders are both extremely familiar to Californians.
Harris’s campaign strategy doesn’t entirely depend on California, though: She hopes for an earlier breakthrough — perhaps in South Carolina, with its very large African-American population, or perhaps in next-door Nevada — that will boost her strength in the Golden State. Democrats’ strictly proportional (subject to a 15 percent threshold) delegate-award rules will make it difficult for Harris to win anything, like a majority of California delegates, but the key thing is that she really cannot afford to run second or third.
Money will ultimately determine which candidates other than Harris decide to “play” in California. An early estimate is that spending in that primary will approach $100 million, or about the same total absorbed by the Iowa Caucuses. Another wild card is how many independents — who can vote in Democratic presidential primaries but must affirmatively request a Democratic ballot — participate; they were Bernie Sanders’s stronghold in 2016, and are now a potential problem for Harris.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 10, 2019
Trump’s Nominee for Deputy AG Won’t Say Brown v. Board of Education Was Rightly Decided

It’s routine for Republican judicial and Justice Department nominees to dodge questions about Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision striking down state abortion bans. And that’s what Deputy Attorney General nominee Jeffrey Rosen did today in his Senate Judiciary Committee confirmation hearings, as the Daily Beast reports:
Since everyone knows the Trump administration is committed to the reversal of Roe but wants to avoid mobilizing supporters of reproductive rights, that response was no surprise. But the same answer to a different question from Blumenthal was another matter:
Brown, of course, was the decision that finally outlawed Jim Crow law in public education. You can watch the exchange here:
Rosen’s not the first Trump appointee to take this tack: Supreme Court Justice Neil Gorsuch and several lower-court nominees also refused to specifically endorse Brown, generally regarded as one of SCOTUS’ greatest decisions, as a correctly decided precedent.
But still, even Trumpites should understand how outrageous it is for the prospective number-two person in the agency responsible for enforcing civil rights laws to take the Fifth on a landmark decision that even open bigots now accept as inevitable and even right. Judges can at least claim they never second-guess each other in informal settings. Rosen has no such excuse.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 10, 2019
How to Break the Highest Glass Ceiling in America

Hillary Clinton’s loss in the 2016 presidential contest was obviously a terrible blow to the high expectations that she would finally shatter the “glass ceiling” preventing women from the highest public office in the land. But the hangover from that defeat is arguably worse: Many Democrats are so convinced that sexism was at the root of her defeat that they are terrified to nominate another woman — or at least another woman superficially like HRC — in 2020. And it’s not just a whispered fear, as the New York Times discovered when it explored this subject recently:
Cusack’s hardly alone. As a 2018 Pew study showed, women seem to have internalized the Clinton defeat as being about sexism far more than men have:
And so, ironically, it’s often outspoken feminists who are the least bullish about nominating another woman to take on the boorish MAGA man in 2020, as the Times report found:
So assuming, as I do, that finally electing a woman as chief executive after 45 men have served is inherently a very good thing, what sort of strategy should those supporting that development embrace to make it happen? Here are some alternatives:
Part of the fear involved in nominating a woman in 2020 is clearly associated with the existential dread Democrats — and perhaps feminists in particular — have about the consequences of a second Trump term. If a man is more likely to head off the prospect of a Supreme Court revoking reproductive rights or an unleashed Trump wreaking even more havoc at home and abroad, maybe (so the thinking goes) it’s worth delaying the presumably inevitable breakthrough of the First Woman President. By the same token, nothing would ameliorate the existential dread more than a slam-dunk general election in which history could be safely made. Yes, Barack Obama was a gifted politician, but a strong Democratic tide heading into 2008 certainly helped give Democrats the courage to nominate an African-American.
This is what might be called the Nixon-Goes-to-China approach, based on the assumption that a post-Trump Republican Party could well try to expand its narrow electoral base by nominating Nikki Haley or Joni Ernst or Marsha Blackburn or Martha McSally. Indeed, if Democrats knew that was going to happen, they might then nominate a woman of their own and guarantee a breakthrough. This is not, obviously, an especially courageous strategy, and might even backfire if the white-male–dominated GOP realized they could delay the election of a woman as president perpetually.
One commonly heard theory is that Hillary Clinton’s candidacy wasn’t slain by undifferentiated sexism, but by a particular variety that she — as an older woman, or as an outspoken feminist or as an established cultural icon or as a policy wonk — particularly stimulated. And some observers think Elizabeth Warren is peculiarly susceptible to the same prejudices, as Peter Beinart explains:
So would a different kind of woman be less susceptible to sexism? Possibly so, says Beinart:
Or, as one female colleague said to me: “Harris has that Olivia Pope vibe going for her” (an allusion to the hyper-competent and glamorous African-American political fixer in the long-running hit TV show Scandal).  And quite possibly Amy Klobuchar and Kirsten Gillibrand could have a different impact on the public than Warren and Clinton.
There’s something deeply dispiriting, defeatist, and — yes — sexist about all those strategies, suggesting as they do that Clinton’s loss — and some future Democratic woman’s loss — are just beyond the little ladies’ control. The reality is that Clinton comfortably won the popular vote and lost the election due to an improbable Electoral College inside straight that Trump likely cannot pull off twice. And her loss was certainly close enough that factors other than her gender — her failure to invest resources in key states she lost, the Comey letter, a general lassitude among liberal voters who had no idea Trump could win — may have been decisive.
At a minimum progressive activists and media observers should fight the sexist assumptions afflicting candidates like Elizabeth Warren instead of promoting or surrendering to them. Given a fresh and direct exposure to her, the “likability” problem might dissolve, as Sady Doyle recently observed:
With a less defeatist attitude, progressives and particularly feminists might invest in building a frontlash — pride among women about Warren’s brains and accomplishments — that can outweigh any sexist backlash. The “nevertheless, she persisted” tagline that followed Warren around in 2017 after Mitch McConnell tried to silence her on the Senate floor might become relevant again as she and other women in the presidential field refuse to give up on the proposition that they are electable as they actually happen to be.
Ultimately that glass ceiling isn’t going to break itself, and waiting for the right moment or the right candidate or the right opponent just keeps it in place perpetually. At a minimum, those who want to see it shatter need to give women a chance in the run-up to 2020. Until such time as voters cast their ballots in caucuses and primaries, it’s premature to decide Democrats can’t “risk” running a woman again. See how they run, and maybe the myth of an incorrigibly sexist electorate will shatter, too.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 9, 2019
White Nationalist Site Makes Money by Streaming Hearing on Rise of White Nationalism

On Tuesday, the House Judiciary Committee held a hearing on white nationalism, featuring witnesses who testified on the movement’s recent rise, and the role that online indoctrination plays in far-right communities. Considering the subject matter — and the trollish habits of those in the movement — it wasn’t a huge surprise that the hearing got derailed.
Conservative provocateur Candace Owens was the witness that first pushed the hearing off-course. “We need to condemn all types of hate speech,” Owens said, complaining of a “double standard” that allows condemnation of Christians and black conservatives. (Of course, such language ignores the very point of a hearing meant to understand the rise of far-right violence, including the recent mosque shooting in New Zealand and the 2018 Tree of Life synagogue shooting in Pittsburgh.) “The hearing today isn’t about white nationalism, it’s a preview of a Democrat 2020 election strategy, same as the 2016 election strategy,” Owens said. “If they were really concerned about white nationalism, they’d hold hearings on Antifa.”
Republicans on the committee ran with Owens’s “All Types of Hate Speech” Matter rhetoric. Texas representative Louie Gohmert asked a Facebook official testifying why the platform is so hard on “my friends, Diamond and Silk.” Arizona representative Andy Biggs asked why Owens was listed on the witness list as a “conservative activist.” As NBC News notes, both Biggs and Gohmert “mused about the concept of staged hate crimes and hoaxes, suggesting they are frequently at play in the United States.” Surprisingly, it wasn’t until the afternoon that Hitler was mentioned, when Democratic representative Ted Lieu played a recording of Owens stating that his plans for Germany were “fine,” but that his “globalized” ambitions were the problem.
If the hearing itself maintained at least some semblance of etiquette, the reception online was lawless. While Google public-policy counsel Alexandria Walden said in front of the committee that “hate speech and violent speech have no place on YouTube,” the site’s users proved her abjectly wrong. After an hour of hurling white nationalist shorthand and epithets against Jews and Muslims on a YouTube livefeed of the hearing, the stream’s comments section was taken down.
Perhaps most egregiously — considering the hearing explored the internet’s role in promoting white nationalist ideas — the far-right YouTube channel Red Ice hosted the livestream of the House testimony as a fundraising tactic. “This is nothing but the elites and globalists setting up laws that will be enacted in a single pen stroke against the white race in the future,” wrote one user, who donated $100. Another user, who donated $10, employed the white nationalist 14 words. Past Red Ice videos have claimed that interracial couples are promoting “white genocide” and that America “can never, ever, ever, be too white” — two common arguments made by far-right media outlets.
Matt Stieb



Apr. 9, 2019
Candace Owens Says the GOP Southern Strategy ‘Never Happened’

There is a revisionist historical theory you hear now and then among conservatives — particularly African-American conservatives who are understandably a mite defensive about their position as a minority of a minority — holding that everything we think we know about the partisan politics of the post–civil-rights era is untrue. And it was enunciated again by the recently famous African-American pro-Trump activist Candace Owens, who was brought in by House Republicans to mock and disrupt a hearing Democrats convened on white nationalism, as the Washington Post reports:
I do not know if Owens subscribes to the fully developed right-wing theory that white racist Lyndon Johnson concocted the Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts and the Great Society program as part of a white racist conspiracy to ensnare African-Americans in the “plantation” of dependency on government. But I wouldn’t be surprised. It’s hard otherwise to deny the basic facts that southern white racists steadily moved, from the early 1960s to the 1980s, from their old stronghold in the Democratic Party to their new home in the GOP — the “southern switch” — or that Republican pols in and beyond the South pursued this development as a “strategy.”
The “southern switch” didn’t happen overnight, or at the same pace at different levels of government, but it happened as surely as computers replaced typewriters and slide rules. It was no coincidence that after voting against the Civil Rights Act of 1964 Barry Goldwater became the first Republican since Reconstruction to carry Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, and South Carolina and the second to carry Louisiana; he did best in Black Belt areas that were long racist hotbeds. All but one of these states went for southern segregationist George Wallace four years later, and after a brief interregnum when native son Jimmy Carter put together black and white southern votes to momentarily bring back the “Solid South,” the race-conscious Deep South has remained predominantly Republican at the presidential level ever since, and at the state and local levels most recently. African-American support for Republicans, which was quite robust prior to the early 1960s, dropped rapidly and never recovered. Racial and partisan polarization in the South is heavily coextensive. If that’s not a “switch” I don’t know what else you could call it.
And of course Republican pols, racist or not, promoted this development as a strategic masterstroke. In a 1970 interview with the New York Times, Kevin Phillips, the prophet of The Emerging Republican Majority and wonder-boy Nixon strategist, put it this way:
Nixon himself was famously in thrall to old-school southern segregationists like Strom Thurmond, who was given a veto over the 1968 vice-presidential nomination and over the administration’s Supreme Court appointments. His landslide reelection in 1972 was in no small part attributable to the capture of the entire 1968 George Wallace vote. Ronald Reagan beat Jimmy Carter in 1980 in part by convincing conservative white southerners finally to abandon Democrats once and for all. And the southern strategy was avidly pursued by later GOP strategists from Lee Atwater to Karl Rove.
Now a lot of people don’t know much about political history, and followers of a president who doesn’t read and routinely disregards facts probably can’t be expected to document their own myths very carefully. But as a white southerner who grew up in the era in question, and watched the “southern switch” and the “southern strategy” in action day in and day out, I just can’t let denialists like Owens have the last word.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 9, 2019
How Late Can Stacey Abrams Wait To Launch a Presidential Candidacy?

In declining to bend to pressure from Chuck Schumer and others to declare for a 2020 Senate race in Georgia, Stacey Abrams indicated last week that she hadn’t ruled out a presidential run and could announce one as last as September. That probably came as news to the 18 candidates already in the field.
FiveThirtyEight’s Geoffrey Skelley took a stroll down memory lane and looked at the announcement dates of every non-incumbent major-party presidential nominee since 1976, and concluded Abrams might want to accelerate her timetable.
As of today, there are 300 days remaining before the Iowa caucuses, currently scheduled for next February 3 (if the date moves at all, it will probably be earlier). A September launch date for Abrams would be later than that of any of the nominees Skelley considers.  And he thinks that’s a real problem:
There have, however, been some late-blooming candidacies that failed to win for reasons other than a late start. Most recently, in the 2012 contest Rick Perry waited until mid-August of 2011 to announce, and within days was looking like he was going to roar past Mitt Romney and win the whole thing. He later faded, but that was mostly because he stumbled and mumbled his way through some disastrous debate performances. That’s very unlikely to happen to Stacey Abrams, who is extremely good on her feet.
Going back a good ways, in 1980 Ted Kennedy announced his intraparty challenge to incumbent president Jimmy Carter on November 8, 1979. He was hurt right off the bat by a famous pre-announcement interview with CBS reporter Roger Mudd in which he was as incoherent as Rick Perry. But he lost mostly because Carter skillfully used the tools of the presidency against him. The same was true of Gerald Ford in 1976; his win had little if anything to do with the “late start” of primary challenger Ronald Reagan, who announced his candidacy on November 20, 1975.
Now it’s true that Kennedy and Reagan had unusually high name recognition going into their late-breaking races; while Abrams has quickly acquired national political celebrity status, she’s not at a Kennedy/Reagan level just yet. To make an autumn candidacy viable, she’d need some major breaks, like a major candidate or two stumbling badly, and no one successfully using the summer debates (which Abrams would miss) to build a commanding lead.
But hey, it’s her career, and unless it’s assumed she’s bluffing, as a potential candidate she remains a real threat to others already in the race–particularly fellow African-Americans Kamala Harris and Cory Booker, neither of whom is likely to beat her in the pivotal early primary in next-door South Carolina. Besides, there’s a lot of attention-grabbing things one can do without being formally announced as a candidate. And Stacey Abrams is quite skillful at grabbing attention, in a good way.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 9, 2019
Bipartisan Bill Would Ban IRS From Making Tax-Filing Free and Easy

If Democrats and Republicans can agree on anything these days, it’s that the tax-filing process should be cheaper and easier for the American people — and also, that the IRS should be legally prohibited from making the tax-filing process cheaper and easier for the American people.
In Washington, there is an official, bipartisan consensus that the tax code should be “simplified,” and that April 15 should be a less fearsome day in the American imagination. But there is also an unofficial bipartisan consensus that preserving the profitability of the tax-preparation industry is more important than making your life easier. For this reason, congressional Republicans will invite Americans to “imagine filing your taxes on a form the size of a postcard” — but never to envision a world in which the government could actually just fill out your tax forms for you. Even though we all already live in such a world.
In Japan and the United Kingdom, most citizens don’t have to file any tax returns whatsoever. Instead, the state directly withdraws the exact amount it’s owned from workers’ paychecks, a process known as “precision withholding.” To account for potential deductions, the state simply examines public records for evidence of charitable donations, mortgage interest payments, or the like. Alternatively, the IRS could simply mail every American a pre-filled tax form, using salary data that the agency already possesses. Or better yet, the agency could develop free tax-filing software that Americans could use to access their pre-filled tax forms, review the information, correct any mistakes, and then submit to Uncle Sam — without even shelling out for a postage stamp.
Such a program would save virtually every American time, money, and worry. But it would also make TurboTax and H&R Block less profitable. And ordinary Americans do not have time to educate themselves about the Japanese tax system, or the money to pressure federal lawmakers into honoring their interests. The tax-preparation industry, by contrast, very much does. Thus, Congress is about to make it illegal for the IRS to develop free tax-filing software. As ProPublica reports:
It’s no surprise that Republicans support such legislation. For all their rhetorical concern for the tax code’s complexity, the conservative movement has an investment in making taxation as conspicuous and painful as possible. (Grover Norquist once decried a proposal for return-free filing as a clear attempt “to raise taxes in a way that leaves politicians with clean hands.”) But how do Democrats rationalize backing such a provision?
The answer is simple (if unsatisfying). At present, the IRS has “a memorandum of understanding” with the tax-preparation industry: If the agency promises not to develop its own tax-filing software, the private tax-prep companies will provide free tax-filing software to all Americans who earn under $66,000. The pending bill would turn this (easily reversible) bureaucratic policy into binding law. Thus, Democrats can frame the proposal as an attempt to permanently secure free tax services for the bottom 70 percent of Americans.
But there are a couple of problems with such a framing. For one thing, there’s no reason why the most powerful government in human history should have to rely on private companies to provide this service. After all, the federal government could do this job better than the private sector, if it were allowed to, because it has unparalleled access to salary data. For another, if the public sector developed the relevant software itself, it could make free tax-filing universal at little additional cost.
But the biggest problem with the existing arrangement is that when you make a “free” service means-tested and privately administered, many low-income Americans will not realize that it exists. And in this case, only  3 percent of eligible U.S. taxpayers use the industry’s free program each year.
Americans deserve at least one political party that doesn’t support privatizing services — that would be better performed by the state — for the sole purpose of protecting entrenched corporate interests. Democrats cannot help TurboTax undermine the IRS, and then claim to be such a party.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 9, 2019
Trump Federal Reserve Nominee Admitted ‘I’m Not an Expert on Monetary Policy’

A little over two and a half years ago, Stephen Moore appeared at a conservative panel on the election and the economy, where one questioner asked about monetary policy. “Well, you know, I’m not an expert on monetary policy,” admitted Moore, before proceeding to deliver an answer bearing out this very confession. (The question concerned “cash flow velocity,” which Moore deflected by ignoring, retreating to a generality — “We want clear rules and a stable dollar” — and then changing the subject to regulation.)
In October, appearing on another panel, Moore demurred on another question about the Federal Reserve by noting, “I’m not a monetary economist, I’m not an expert on monetary policy.”
Moore could casually admit his non-expertise in the subject because, at that moment, it was impossible for anybody in the room, least of all Moore, to imagine that one day he might be nominated for a position on the Federal Reserve Board. The old “what is your greatest weakness?” interview question is one you’re supposed to answer by noting some peripheral trait or skill. You can say “monetary policy” — I’m no monetary policy expert, either — as long as the job you’re gunning for is not in central banking.
Yet here we are. President Trump’s two nominees for the Federal Reserve Board, Stephen Moore and Herman Cain, are in so far over their heads that not long ago they wouldn’t even pretend to be qualified in the field. Now the president is asking to nominate two obvious amateurs to the most powerful central bank in the world. Like many Trump-era episodes, this one combines existential terror with overt comedy. Moore resembles Martin Short’s character from the old Saturday Night Live sketch who has quit his job to compete in the Olympics in synchronized swimming even though he admits he’s “not a strong swimmer.”
Faced with the prospect of attempting to confirm two absurdly unqualified cranks for esteemed Fed positions, the conservative movement has undertaken a triage operation, focusing its defenses on Moore and leaving Cain to twist in the wind. The decision to save Moore at Cain’s expense makes some sense: Of the two, Cain’s kookery was on more colorful display through his slapstick 2012 presidential campaign. Cain’s treatment of women (numerous sexual-harassment lawsuits) is harder to defend than Moore’s (open adultery followed by failure to pay child support.)
Still, the defenses of Moore have a distinctly weary undertone. The Wall Street Journal endorses its former staffer, gamely notes that “as an individual Fed governor, Mr. Moore wouldn’t likely wield much influence.” Yes, “the alleged rap” on him is that “he has on occasion been wrong about monetary policy,” the editorial allows with considerable understatement. But it proceeds to point out that former Fed chairman Ben Bernanke made some failed predictions in 2003 and 2007.
That is fair enough. On the other hand, there is no known video of Bernanke begging off a question on monetary policy by saying he is not an expert in the subject. Nor have Bernanke’s erroneous predictions approached the level of nuttery evinced by Moore, who at times has called for the gold standard and cast doubt on the validity of official economic figures. (“Nobody believes the statistics out of Washington and often for good reasons,” Moore wrote in 2015.)
Moore’s errors are not only grotesque and borne of near-total ignorance of the field, they follow a consistent pattern: he demands the Federal Reserve choke the economy under Democratic presidents, citing imaginary inflation, and then veers wildly to the opposite extreme under Republican ones. Republicans already follow this principle on fiscal policy, toggling between hysterical demands for immediate drastic austerity under Democratic presidents to unrestrained profligacy under Republican ones. The Fed is designed to operate insulated from political pressure. Moore and/or Cain would break the seal on turning it into a partisan body.
Rather than attempt to discard his hack-ish reputation, Moore is leaning into his value as a political operative. “If the economy stays this strong for the next two years,” he gushed to a right-wing talk-show host this week, “Trump is going to win an overwhelming landslide reelection.” (This appearance, as well as his 2016 panels, were uncovered by Sam Bell.)
Politico reports that Cain’s nomination “may have actually eased” Moore’s confirmation prospects, because “Republicans may be hard-pressed to revolt against both of Trump’s nominees.” The sadly plausible assumption here is that Senate Republican willingness to oppose Trump is a finite resource. Therefore they may wave Moore through on the grounds that he is, on the margin, less flagrantly unqualified than Cain. The least-bad pick is the one who admitted he doesn’t know very much about the subject that is soon going to be his entire job.
This post has been updated.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 9, 2019
Barr Plans to Release Mueller Report Within a Week, Won’t Say If Trump Got a Sneak Peek

Attorney General William Barr would have been happy if he could have just testified on funding for the Justice Department at today’s House Appropriations Committee hearing. But since he’s sitting on the year’s most important piece of information, the Mueller report, that wasn’t going to happen. And so he was grilled on the whens and hows of the report’s release, as the Washington Post reported:
That means he’s on track to meet the “mid-April” time frame for release of the report to both Congress and the public that he indicated after sending Congress a synopsis of legal findings of the Mueller investigation on March 24. A lot of cynical media folk immediately predicted a weekend release like that of the earlier document, to limit public attention to the document.
As he had earlier stipulated, Barr noted there will be four areas in which material in the report will be “redacted” (i.e., blacked out):
That will not satisfy congressional Democrats (and perhaps even a few Republicans) who can be expected to ask for broader disclosure of the report’s contents, but the extent to which demands become formal will depend on the scope of redactions.
Eyebrows were raised during the hearing when Barr evaded questions about whether he had given a sneak peek of or briefing about the report’s contents to the president or other administration officials, as the New York Times reported:
If Trump did get more than the synopsis, it could have helped the White House with its efforts to spin the entire investigation as a time-wasting “witch hunt” that had nonetheless “exonerated” him, whether or not the report actually supported that interpretation. So this isn’t the last time the question about who got the material when will be asked, particularly if the White House got to see an un-redacted version.
For now, all we know is that a lot of politicians and journalists in D.C. are trying to clear their schedules for the coming week.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 9, 2019
What I’ve Learned From Collecting Stories of People Whose Loved Ones Were Transformed by Fox News

It was somewhere around the 100th response that my brain turned to mush.
Last week, I devoted an installment of my newsletter Welcome to Hell World to a dozen stories from people who, like me, had close relationships that had been strained or ruined by family members who’d become obsessed with Fox News.
No matter where the stories came from they all featured a few familiar beats: A loved one seemed to have changed over time. Maybe that person was already somewhat conservative to start. Maybe they were apolitical. But at one point or another, they sat down in front of Fox News, found some kind of deep, addictive comfort in the anger and paranoia, and became a different person — someone difficult, if not impossible, to spend time with. The fallout led to failed marriages and estranged parental relationships. For at least one person, it marks the final memory he’ll ever have of his father: “When I found my dad dead in his armchair, fucking Fox News was on the TV,” this reader told me. “It’s likely the last thing he saw. I hate what that channel and conservative talk radio did to my funny, compassionate dad. He spent the last years of his life increasingly angry, bigoted, and paranoid.”
Something about the piece struck a chord. It had gone viral, and wave after wave of frustrated and saddened Fox News orphans began to commiserate with me and with each other on Twitter and in my messages. Others wrote of similar phenomenon in Australia with the television channel Sky or in the U.K. with the tabloid Daily Mail. I heard from more than a hundred people who felt like they could relate to what they all seemed to think of as a kind of ideological brain poisoning. They chose Fox News over their family, people told me. They chose Fox News over me.
There was the one reader who wrote of his Puerto Rican uncle becoming a Fox News junkie, and turning on his own people, as he put it, in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria. “He was literally sitting in the dark and still defending Trump,” he said, which seemed a metaphor almost too on the nose. Hearing stories like that over and over again all weekend wasn’t pretty.
As some critics of the piece pointed out, it seems a bit silly, if not stupid, to scapegoat a cable-news network for our family members’ interpersonal shortcomings. I get that. I don’t have an empirical way to assign blame or figure out causality. Maybe Fox News causes some people to turn toward hard-right conservatism; maybe it’s merely a precipitating factor; maybe it’s neither, and for most people, change in political attitudes came from elsewhere. In requesting stories about family members and Fox News, I wasn’t undertaking a scientific experiment — merely seeking to see if there are other people who had the same experiences I had, and felt the same way I did.
What I learned is that there are. Whatever the actual direction of causality, there are many, many Americans who blame Fox News for changes in their loved ones, and many people out there who feel as though their friends and family members have been lost to a 24/7 stream of right-wing propaganda.
Dozens who responded to my piece talked about the sad lonely twilight of their parents’ or grandparents’ lives, having been spurned by, or having disowned much of their families over political disagreements. Older people, recent studies have shown, are much more likely to share misleading information online, but the anecdotes I was hearing seemed to indicate this behavior wasn’t limited to the internet. Young parents wrote that they don’t want to bring their children to visit aging Fox-brainers. “The worst is when my children go to spend time with their grandparents and come home with Fox News talking points coming out of their mouths,” one told me. “I have to decontaminate them every time.”
I heard from several people that Fox News was a key factor in a divorce. One reader told me about his father, a one-time Trump skeptic turned believer. “He and my mom separated last November. There were other reasons but one of the big ones was his Fox addiction,” he wrote. “I went down to help him get set up in a new apartment. He cried a lot. We found an apartment and furniture and I got the utilities set up but I did not sign up for cable TV. He did that after I left, before he got a job.”
Another person told me that Rush Limbaugh sent his father on the path to isolation before eventually mainlining Fox News on a regular basis. Eventually, out of the blue, his mother filed for divorce. “He was crushed, couldn’t understand why, and took comfort in drinking while watching his friends on TV. She is happier than I have ever seen her and he is sad and angry living in the basement of a rented house, still watching The Five, Tucker Carlson, Jeanine Pirro, etc.”
For some, the Fox-driven political affiliations of family members represent a deep betrayal. A son wrote to me of his widowed father choosing Fox News over the well-being of him and his wife, both of whom are disabled. “He is aware that the GOP wants to take away health care and he still voted for Trump. He still likes Trump.”
If I had to pinpoint the most common reaction to all the thousands of replies to the story, I’d say it was one of exasperation — and desperation. I didn’t realize so many other people were dealing with this, many said. “Does anyone know an online support group for people going through this to share tips on deprogramming and/or surviving these relationships?” one asked. “If not … would anyone be interested in starting one?” It’s not the worst idea. The most positive story I heard came from a woman who brought her brother back from the edge with persistent and careful and sustained bridge-building work, showing him the error of his paranoid conspiracy thinking.
One problem is that once someone gets pulled into the Fox News vortex it naturally leads to other scummier enterprises. You might start out signing up for a Fox email list or one from the president then quickly find your email being sold far and wide to increasingly less reputable charlatans. “The thing that makes me maddest about this is that it’s about money,” one correspondent said. His dad had been diagnosed with prostate cancer a year ago. “I guess Mike Huckabee has been selling his email to fucking everybody, including one list I noticed when I was getting his email set up called Beyond Chemo. They are selling him his own anger and a bunch of mushroom pills for all the money he doesn’t have anymore,” he said. “He’s gonna die destitute because of this shit and people belong in prison for seeing this as a business opportunity.”
Those who hadn’t yet broken off with family said maintaining the relationship with a person they love is exceptionally difficult, and requires all manner of safeguards. “I’ve been on eggshells with my dad for half my life now,” one wrote. “It really hurts having a father who is kind and smart but has Fox News brain worms. I can only talk to my dad about the weather. Anything else will set him off, even football …”
To be fair, there is a rough analog on the other side of the political spectrum, even if it seems, anecdotally, relatively muted. More than a few readers wrote to say this all made them thankful they merely had to contend with Dem-Boomer family who had gone mad for Maddow and Russiagate. “My grandma is a huge Maddow person and operates the same way as Fox News brained people,” one wrote me. “The signaling she gets and reiterates from MSNBC happens in the same sort of ‘brain rot’ way. Like, she heard something on there, or on Facebook, that was about how Trump is about to get impeached — and every day I talk to her and she repeats that.”
“I love her, and she’s bright and it’s obviously less offensive” than Fox News, the reader continued, “but the whole fucking garbage corporate 24 hour news model is insidious and so so fucking bad.”
The unfortunate familial balancing act is one I know well from my own family, where an argument, even among people who have explicitly agreed to avoid politics altogether, can erupt at any time. (Many people insisted, like I do myself, that their Trump-kissing parents are the kindest, sweetest people in the world and it makes no sense they would be Fox News viewers.) But it’s one thing to have grown up a liberal in a conservative family, and learned how to navigate difficult political conversations your entire life — even if those conversations have only gotten more difficult. But many of the people I heard from talked about a transformation, whether gradual or sudden.
One woman told me about her mother, who has stopped talking to her since becoming convinced Democrats are murdering children. It wasn’t always this way, she explained. Her mother had been a Democrat until 2008, and then something switched.
A lot of the stories echoed that turning point. There was something about Obama that seemed to make a lot of previously apolitical or moderate family members lose their minds. Gosh — what could it have possibly been?
This is, I think, where the channel’s genius lies. Any salesperson or con artist will tell you that you can’t incept a thought in a mark’s mind out of nowhere. You have to find the hook that’s already there — fear, or desire — and exploit it. When it comes to exacerbating and honing the anxieties of aging Americans you can’t do much better (or worse) than race and immigration.
Because the truth is, Fox News didn’t invent racism, and many of our family members would’ve believed in it on their own. This may have been the hardest thing I learned from the stories I heard: Fox didn’t necessarily change anyone’s mind, so much as it seems to have supercharged and weaponized a politics that was otherwise easy for white Americans to overlook in their loved ones. “Maybe he was always like this, but lacked the exhaust chamber to say out loud what he was thinking. I’ll never know,” one person told me. “It just sucks because I know the people he hates so much are basically the same people as me.”
Luke O'Neil



Apr. 9, 2019
If You Are Defending Stephen Miller, You Are an Ally of Anti-Semitism

Stephen Miller is personally responsible for the most xenophobic policies of the most xenophobic presidency in modern American history. The senior White House adviser authored the travel ban that denied a wide variety of American Muslims the right to be visited by their overseas relatives. He implored the president to adopt a policy of family separation at the southern border, arguing that Central American families would be less likely to seek asylum in the United States if the U.S. government gained a reputation for subjecting their children to psychological torment. The public hated this policy, and the judiciary struck it down. Meanwhile, the Trump administration proved itself incapable of competently administering the program: the U.S. government ended up losing track of thousands of migrant children and allowing others to be legally adopted by U.S. citizens without their birth parents’ consent. 
And yet Stephen Miller believes that the family separation policy was a success. In his view, having the U.S. government permanently break up a few hundred Central American families is an acceptable price to pay for discouraging such people from exercising their legal right to seek asylum in the United States. Therefore, Miller is advising the president to adopt “a modified version of the family separation policy known as ‘binary choice.’” As the New York Times explains:
In response to this and other reports of Miller’s growing influence in the White House, Democratic congresswoman Ilhan Omar tweeted Monday, “Stephen Miller is a white nationalist. The fact that he still has influence on policy and political appointments is an outrage.”
Reasonable people can disagree about whether or not it is worth maintaining a semantic distinction between individuals who openly identify as white nationalists and those whose words and deeds betray an ideological commitment to maintaining the United States as a majority-white nation. But it is impossible to understand the Trump administration’s immigration policies without stipulating that it subscribes to a “soft-core” or reformist version of white nationalism.
We can’t look into Stephen Miller’s heart, or search X-rays of his body for signs of “racist bones.” But we do know that he has tried to ban Chinese students from American universities and pushed for the deportation of Vietnamese refugees who have been in the United States for decades — a policy with no national-security, economic, or assimilationist rationale. We also know that Miller reportedly told a colleague, “I would be happy if not a single refugee foot ever again touched American soil”; and a middle-school classmate, that they couldn’t be friends anymore because of the classmate’s “Latino heritage.” And we know that he wrote in his high-school yearbook, quoting Teddy Roosevelt, “There can be no fifty-fifty Americanism in this country. There is room here for only 100 percent Americanism, only for those who are Americans and nothing else.”
Given all this, it seems both fair to describe Miller as a white nationalist and nearly impossible to ascribe a non-racist motivation to his political behavior.
But Republicans think otherwise. In their view, we must always strive to interpret the motivations of our political adversaries with maximum generosity — and resist the temptation to brand them as bigots unless there is indisputable, documentary evidence to substantiate such a charge.
Which is why they’re branding Ilhan Omar’s criticism of Miller as anti-Semitic.
“During my time in Congress before @IlhanOmar got here, I didn’t once witness another Member target Jewish people like this with the name calling & other personal attacks,” Jewish Republican congressman Lee Zeldin tweeted. “In 2019 though, for @IlhanOmar, this is just called Monday.”
President Trump echoed Zeldin’s sentiments Tuesday morning:
It is true that Stephen Miller is Jewish, and that white nationalists have historically targeted Jews for persecution. But this does not mean that Miller cannot be a white nationalist. There was a time in the U.S. when white supremacists were virulently anti-Catholic, and considered the Irish to be a subhuman race. That has not made it impossible for an Irish Catholic like Steve Bannon to openly endorse white-nationalist novels and thinkers. “White people” is not a coherent biological or ethnic category. It is a social caste with semi-porous borders. And by all appearances, Miller identifies with that caste. More to the point, there is no evidence whatsoever that Omar directed her criticism toward Miller because of his Jewish heritage and not because of his (undisputed) status as the White House’s most influential and hardline immigration adviser.
But the GOP’s decision to brand Omar’s comments as anti-Semitic is something much worse than unfair or unsupportable. It is confirmation that the party sees anti-Semitism less as a scourge to be combatted than as a political cudgel to be exploited.
Last fall, Stephen Miller encouraged the president to focus his midterm message on the threat posed by a caravan of Central American migrants. Trump proceeded to tell supporters that this caravan  was an “invasion,” that “the Democrats had something to do with it,” and that he “wouldn’t be surprised” if the Jewish billionaire George Soros was financing this “invasion” in an attempt to rig the midterm elections.
Lee Zeldin did not object to these remarks. In his view, it was not anti-Semitic (or even irresponsible) for the president to suggest that a wealthy Jew was orchestrating an invasion of the United States, using nonwhite immigrants as his shock troops — even though the president was saying such things just days after a neo-Nazi had murdered 11 people in a Pittsburgh synagogue because he believed that Jews were orchestrating an invasion of the United States, using nonwhite immigrants as their shock troops. Instead, Zeldin chose to demonstrate his solidarity with American Jews last fall by inviting Steve Bannon to headline one of his campaign events.
It is worth noting that even if Trump’s revanchist nativism didn’t contain traces of anti-Semitism, it would remain a form of politics that endangers Diaspora Jews. Jewish reactionaries like Stephen Miller might be able to assimilate to the form of Americanism that Trump champions. But the vast majority of American Jews are liberal, cosmopolitan, and secularist. Which is to say: They are the “globalist” villains in Trumpism’s Manichaean fable of American decline.
And even if Trump’s politics did not endanger Jews, anyone who has ever uttered “never again” in earnest would still be obliged to oppose him. If you are a Jew who has “zero tolerance” for anti-Semitism — but infinite tolerance for a president who describes immigrants as an “infestation,” and directs extrajudicial cruelty at their children — then you aren’t so different from the Nazis’ apologists. You share their conviction that some populations are entitled to basic rights, while others are not.
You just believe the führer should have included your people among the chosen.
Eric Levitz



Apr. 9, 2019
In the Trump Era, Political Incorrectness on the Rise

One of the major grievances of the coalition that elected Donald Trump president was the oppression of “political correctness.” There are, of course, varying definitions of that term, though Trump and his entourage have almost invariably interpreted it to mean any negative reaction to his crude bullying of vulnerable and marginalized people. And while some of the concerns about political correctness may indeed involve rigid campus-speech codes affecting a relative handful of elite students, it’s hard to avoid the impression that for the average MAGA fan the main beef is that you can’t tell racist and sexist jokes at work any more without someone getting huffy about it.
But the Trump Era seems to have stimulated a wave of self-liberation among bigots. One alarming indicator is a sharp rise in hate crimes. But as a new Pew survey of racial attitudes shows, there’s a corresponding rise in old-fashioned racist talk. 65 percent of Americans say “since Trump became president it has become more common for people to express racist or racially insensitive views.” Forty-five percent say such expressions have become “more acceptable.” Fifty-six percent believe Trump has made race relations in the country worse (only 25 percent feel that way about Barack Obama). What a token of restored American greatness!
Pew unsurprisingly finds a significant gap between white and black perceptions of racial justice and injustice. Seventy-eight percent of African-Americans think “our country hasn’t gone far enough in giving blacks equal rights with whites.” Only 37 percent of whites agree.
But the partisan perception gap between white Democrats and Republicans is even larger.
Pretty clearly, the direction of the country on race relations depends more on partisan control of government than it has since the pre–Civil Rights days when white racists were for the most part consolidated in the Democratic Party. And one can only imagine the sense of freedom the proudly politically incorrect would feel in a second Trump term.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 9, 2019
Can Progressives Forgive Kamala Harris Her Past Moderation?

Put aside ideology for a moment, and you can quickly see why California Senator Kamala Harris is a demographic dream candidate for president.  Her father is Jamaican, her mother is Indian, her husband is Jewish, and she’s relatively young (54) and even more youthful looking, in a field dominated by septuagenarians, with a pleasant though entirely professional manner. The adjective you always hear about her is “disciplined,” which is a quality Democrats definitely want in gambling on anyone to take on Donald Trump and the savage hate-fest he is certain to unleash on his opponent.
But in competing for progressive support (which she needs to do as a prospective “unity candidate” in the left-leaning field of a left-leaning party), Harris has a problem: Her entire 13-year career in public office before her election to the Senate in 2016 was as a prosecutor, first as district attorney of San Francisco and then as attorney general of California. For some progressives, that alone is an issue, as encapsulated in the frequently heard taunt: “Kamala Harris Is a Cop.” For others, the concern is simply that Harris rarely if ever was front and center on major controversies relevant to her profession, from criminal-justice reform to prosecution of big-time corporate criminals. Indeed, some of her signature initiatives (like the fight against school truancy in San Francisco, in which she proposed criminal sanctions on parents for kids who missed classes) arguably aimed at insulating her from any attacks on her right flank.
This is a particular worry for her campaign manager — who also happens to be her sister — Maya Harris, a respected civil rights attorney who was an officer in the ACLU and helped edit Michelle Alexander’s landmark book on mass incarceration, The New Jim Crow. While she can certainly vouch for her sister’s soundness on such issues, she cannot always explain away the moderation — or some would say, lack of courage — that has marked the candidate’s public career, at least up until the time she ran for the Senate.
It appears the family/campaign narrative to explain the Harris sisters’ different paths (which have now converged) is that one chose the inside and the other the outside, as Jamileh King reports:
A more subtle but parallel argument for Kamala Harris’s moderation is made in a long profile of the candidate by Elizabeth Weil:
It’s what Weil describes as Harris’s “long game,” which “infuriated constituents over the years who wanted Harris to take a stand and fight for them today, not when she reached a higher office.” That’s part of a narrative in which all the audacity she stored up over the years to protect her career is now flowering fully in her progressive plans for the presidency.
This, of course, makes Harris very different from, say, Bernie Sanders, who for the most part is promoting the same agenda now as he did when he entered Congress in 1990. Elizabeth Warren is another rival who has been very consistent in a shorter political career. So even those who believe electing a multiracial woman as president would be a huge breakthrough moment for the country may struggle to prefer her to candidates who have been, to quote George McGovern’s 1972 campaign slogan, “right from the start.”
Harris has in her favor a path to the Democratic nomination that is entirely plausible (it’s basically Barack Obama’s in 2008, with the added factor of an early primary in her huge home state of California), combined with the vulnerabilities of so many others in the enormous field. If she can gain some momentum, she could indeed become a unity candidate, with her timid, moderate law-enforcement record perhaps even helping her party in a close general election. But first she needs to build some trust with doubting progressives, and that may mean sounding as tough on herself as she used to sound about the objects of her prosecutorial ill intentions.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 9, 2019
Bernie Sanders’s Love of the Filibuster Is His Craziest Position

To imagine that Bernie Sanders could be elected president and enact something resembling his agenda requires a number of extremely generous assumptions. Perhaps the most realistic of these is that Senate Democrats eliminate the legislative filibuster, bringing the number of senators needed to vote for Medicare for All, a Green New Deal, and other ambitious programs from a completely unimaginable 60 to a still wildly unlikely 50.
Sanders himself, however, opposes such a maneuver. In 2013, Sanders appeared to favor majoritarian reforms, but he has veered sharply and inexplicably to the right. Two months ago, he said he “not crazy about getting rid of the filibuster.” In an interview with Amanda Terkel, Sanders reiterates his view, because “you have to protect minority rights.”
This is an odd argument to make. The federal government, by design, makes it unusually difficult to pass new laws, which require concurrent majorities in three separately elected bodies. On top of that, one of those bodies, the Senate, is designed to give disproportionate voting power to citizens who live in sparsely populated states. And on top of that, the Senate has yet another feature that evolved entirely by accident: a supermajority requirement. The filibuster evolved out of a weird historical glitch, and the number of senators required to end it has changed over time, currently standing at 60.
Sanders normally treats unique features of American government with some suspicion. (“The U.S. is the only major country on earth that doesn’t guarantee health care to all people” is something he has pointed out some 80 gazillion times.) Most democratic legislative bodies in the world allow the side that has more votes to win. Why does Sanders believe political minorities, who can block laws merely by winning either the House or the Senate or the presidency, need extra rights?
Sanders is correct, of course, that sometimes Republicans have control of the House, Senate, and presidency, and during those moments, a supermajority voting requirement helps Democrats. But the notion that the filibuster helps Democrats as much as it helps Republicans seems fanciful. Progressives generally tend to support more change than conservatives, and the changes they do enact are more likely to stick. On the whole, repealing all the laws ever passed would benefit conservatives more than liberals. This is why Orrin Hatch correctly declared the filibuster is “what’s prevented our country for decades from sliding toward liberalism.”
Because the Senate’s procedures are so unwieldy, senators have created multiple carve-outs. They do not necessarily follow a rational pattern. Both parties have eliminated the filibuster for judges. That means passing a law requires 218 House votes, 60 Senate votes, plus the president, while just 50 Senate votes and the president — and no House vote at all — can confirm a jurist for a lifetime appointment that confers supreme final authority to strike down any law. Nobody would or did design a system with such a massive bias toward inaction.
And yet one of the oddities of the filibuster is that, even though it has repeatedly evolved, senators have come to treat its byzantine features as hallowed traditions passed down from on high. Sanders defends the possibility of passing his agenda by highlighting another workaround, called budget reconciliation. “I do think that every piece of legislation that I am fighting for can be passed with good legislative processes, including budget reconciliation,” he tells Terkel.
Budget reconciliation is one of the ways the Senate manages to hobble around the filibuster. It’s a rule that allows the chamber to pass annual fiscal bills with a majority vote. The rules are designed to allow changes to taxes and spending to pass with 50 votes, so that that government can enact budgets. But reconciliation bills can only enact changes to taxes and spending.
What this means is that a party that has control of government, but lacks 60 Senate votes, has an overwhelming incentive to cram its agenda into a form that can pass via reconciliation. But, as any expert in Senate procedure will tell you, it’s not a “good legislative process.” It’s a terrible legislative process. It forces the majority to make laws without being able to change regulations.
One of the obstacles Republicans faced when they tried to repeal Obamacare was that using reconciliation prevented them from designing an alternative even if they wanted to. Reconciliation would probably prevent Medicare-for-all or any real single-payer plan. Needless to say, any attempt to break up the financial industry, increase the minimum wage, or pass any other major reform would be completely ineligible under budget reconciliation procedures.
Sanders is trying to simultaneously argue that a supermajority requirement is needed to protect political minorities, and that there is already an effective process to let the majority pass new laws. The filibuster is bad for (small-d) democrats and (large-D) Democrats. That the most left-wing member of the Senate is justifying minority-rule processes whose only justification is to inhibit progress may be the single most baffling position any candidate has taken.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 9, 2019
Who Hasn’t Told Bill de Blasio That He Shouldn’t Run for President?

Bill de Blasio is fond of a certain phrase from John Lindsay, the mayor of New York from 1966 to 1973: The city’s top executive position is the “second-toughest job in America.” After swapping parties, Lindsay expressed interest in the Democratic ticket for president before being edged out early in the primary. Like de Blasio, Lindsay didn’t have full support for his candidacy on the home front: Shortly before he bailed on the race in 1971, Brooklyn Democratic Party chairman and local playmaker Meade Esposito said, “I think the handwriting is on the wall. [Lindsay] better come home.”
De Blasio hasn’t officially declared his candidacy for president, though it sure looks like he’s going to, traveling to early primary states, holding $5,000-a-plate fundraisers, and opening his own PAC to fund national candidates and pay for his own stateside travel. He’s also pretty close to qualifying for the primary debates this summer, needing a one percent showing in just one more reputable poll to make the cut. Though the mayor appears ready to take on the toughest job in America, his allies in New York — not to mention his constituency — aren’t quite as thrilled. Below, a brief guide to everyone who’s told the mayor no.
De Blasio gets a lot of flack for his frequent commutes all the way from Gracie Mansion to the Park Slope YMCA — the Times once called the gym his Camp David. But according to a WNYC report, some Park Slope voters have more serious concerns about his record on education: “Black children and people of color are still not getting a proper education,” Onilaja Waters said. “I would tell the people of the United States that this is someone who talks a progressive agenda, but what we see in New York City is very mixed.”
In a Quinnipiac poll from April 3, 76 percent of New York voters said “de Blasio should not run for president.” It’s not that they necessarily wanted him borough-bound either: In the same poll, the mayor suffered a negative 42–44 percent job approval-disapproval rating. “I’m glad I could unify the people of New York City,” de Blasio said at a news conference, responding to the poll.
In February, all seven candidates for the stepping-stone ombudsman position came out against a de Blasio candidacy. “The mayor may qualify to run for president,” said former Council speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito, who ultimately lost the race to Jumaane Williams. “I’m not sure he’s qualified to run for president.” Queens assemblyman Ron Kim called a de Blasio bid “delusional.”
“I believe Bill de Blasio has 100 percent the right message; I’m just not so sure he’s the right messenger,” Katz told Gotham Gazette.
“He is stubborn about doing things that he feels entitled to do, but don’t do him any favors politically and don’t make a lot of sense,” a former City Hall aide told Politico. Many former staffers reportedly agree that he is “arrogant.”
Phil Singer, a Democratic political consultant who worked on the Kerry and Clinton campaigns in 2004 and 2008, told Politico that de Blasio’s “personality is not endearing. There’s a little bit of self-righteousness about him that thus far hasn’t translated into a groundswell of support for a federal candidacy.”
The idea of a de Blasio candidcay is “fucking insane,” one former aide told Politico, laughing out loud. Another self-described friend of the mayor said the idea of a de Blasio presidential bid is “idiotic.”
The mayor has said that the only adviser he needs on his team is his wife. But First Lady of New York City Chirlane McCray isn’t totally onboard. In a February interview with Politico’s Women Rule podcast, McCray said that she believes her husband would “be a great president.” However, “the timing is not exactly right.”
Matt Stieb



Apr. 8, 2019
Erick Erickson Denies Buttigieg Can Be a Christian

It’s hardly news that a lot of conservative Evangelical leaders sneer contemptuously at anyone practicing any other form of Christianity as inauthentically Christian. But they are usually a bit circumspect about presuming to judge the faith of other believers in a public way.
Not the famously voluble and extremely self-confident conservative commentator Erick Erickson. I once dubbed him Pope Erick for his presumption in denying that any true Christian could possibly fail to understand that homosexuality is condemned for all eternity. So it’s no surprise that Erickson is now taking up the cudgel against Pete Buttigieg for being outspokenly gay and Christian. Behold this arrogance:
Thus Erickson dismisses a Christian tradition dating back to the 16th century, and in its apostolic succession and creeds, much longer than that. But it’s part and parcel of an extended temper tantrum that Erickson and his colleagues at the Resurgent have been pitching over the ignominy of Buttigieg calling himself Christian. Here’s a sample from Erickson himself:
To be clear here, Erickson is not simply asserting that he believes Buttigieg’s interpretation of Christianity is in error (though as the tragedy of church history illustrates, this kind of sectarian disputation often involves un-Christian attitudes), but is judging Buttigieg’s faith (hence the headline “Pete Buttigieg Shows Why Progressive Christianity Is a Hypocritical Farce”) as inauthentic on grounds that it makes no sense from the perspective of his own sectarian biblical-literalist viewpoint. Erkickson believes it’s clear that Christianity is incompatible with homosexuality and legalized abortion. Millions of people who go to Christian churches regularly and pray and try to follow Christ don’t agree. Yet he dares demean their faith as a “farce.”
I occasionally succumb to the temptation to turn these accusations around 180 degrees:
But while my suspicions about the worldliness of the Christian right generally may be accurate, I recant any efforts to deny the authenticity of any individual’s faith. I used to have some rural relatives who refused to acknowledge daylight savings time because standard time was “God’s time.” That’s precisely the kind of confusion between religion and secular traditionalism that I think many conservative Evangelicals tend to nourish. But I don’t doubt my country cousins’ deeply felt desire to do God’s will. So I won’t try to peer into Erick Erickson’s soul and judge his faith. It’s very unlikely he’d ever reciprocate that token of respect and humility. That’s just a cross that progressive Christians must bear.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 8, 2019
Trump Demands Homeland Security Secretary Who Will Break the Law

In his first week as president, Donald Trump addressed employees at the Department of Homeland Security and instructed them that their mission would be to carry out the law. “I am asking all of you to enforce the laws of the United States of America … We are going to restore the rule of law in the United States,” he said.
Here Trump was hewing closely to the themes that had been developed for years by the most respectable conservative immigration hawks. Their complaint about illegal immigration was not the immigration part but the illegal part. Indeed, many conservatives expressed openness to higher levels of at least some forms of legal immigration. Trump himself repeatedly endorsed more legal immigration — just two months ago, he said, “I want people to come into our country, in the largest numbers ever, but they have to come in legally.” It was all a matter of immigrating “the right way” rather than “the wrong way.”
The law-and-order façade has been crumbling for a long time. But the firing of Kirstjen Nielsen as secretary of DHS truly reveals how little Trump or his party actually care about the law at all.
In recent months, Trump has not bothered to conceal his impatience for legal niceties. He has publicly mocked the idea that courts should oversee asylum hearings (“Get rid of judges”), and claimed unilateral authority to spend federal money on border fencing despite being denied authorization by Congress. Reporting on Nielsen’s departure shows that her central disqualification was an unwillingness to violate the law.
CNN reports that Trump “becoming increasingly unhinged” in his demands to Nielsen, and kept making demands incompatible with “legal, humanitarian and international realities.” The president personally instructed border agents to defy the law and simply not let migrants in. A senior administration official explains, chillingly, “At the end of the day, the President refuses to understand that the Department of Homeland Security is constrained by the laws.”
The New York Times adds that Trump’s demands included “things that were clearly illegal, such as blocking all migrants from seeking asylum,” but that any such explanation by the Homeland Security Secretary “only infuriated Mr. Trump further.” And NBC reports that Trump has demanded that Nielsen reinstate the family-separation policy, but she has resisted on the grounds that it would violate the executive order Trump signed last June.
While these accounts obviously come from Nielsen or her allies, and tend to present her tenure in a favorable light, the important thing here is not her sainthood. Clearly Nielsen had little or no humanitarian objection to Trump’s immigration agenda. But she did have a breaking point, and it was the very thing the administration claimed to be upholding all along: the rule of law.
One reason Trump has abandoned his pretext of simply following the law is that the immigration crisis is not related to breaking immigration laws. The surge at the border is migrants seeking asylum. They are not sneaking in, but presenting themselves at crossing points legally.
Trump’s response has been revealing. He has not abandoned his demand for a wall (which is of course irrelevant to refugees arriving at ports of entry). He has instead switched to insisting the “country is full,” without bothering to explain why, or even that, he has reversed his previous stance of welcoming larger numbers of legal immigrants.
The internal mental processes that created this reversal are, as usual, simple and fairly transparent. The wave of enthusiasm Trump unleashed was not a fervor for the efficient administration of immigration law. It was a racialized panic over cultural change.
A Washington Post account from last year depicts Trump regaling his advisers with stories of his rallies and the visceral response he drew when he linked immigrants with crime:
Conservative elites have tried to convince themselves that what Republican voters really mean when they cheer for the wall and repeat lurid stories of Latino men committing horrific crimes is that they just want the law to be followed. Trump, as he has done so many times, has turned the rationalizations made on his own behalf into a joke.
This post has been updated.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 8, 2019
America Used to Have an Overseas Empire. What Happened to It?

A few years ago I was preparing to write a magazine profile of Rodrigo Duterte, who had then recently been elected as president of the Philippines, when I came across “The White Man’s Burden,” Rudyard Kipling’s famous ode to imperialism, in a history book. I had never seen the full title before: “The White Man’s Burden: The United States and the Philippine Islands.” I had always thought it was a racist relic of the British empire! But no, Kipling wrote it after the U.S. won the Philippines from the Spanish in the Spanish-American War in 1898. The victory had announced America as a world power to be reckoned with, complete with overseas colonies. Kipling was posing himself as an emissary from the older and wiser imperial power with advice for the upstart on how to deal with their new brown people: “Take up the White Man’s burden — / Send forth the best ye breed — / Go bind your sons to exile / To serve your captives’ need.”
Only an American such as myself could be so totally oblivious to their own country’s imperial past. “One of the truly distinctive features of the United States’ empire is how persistently ignored it has been,” the historian Daniel Immerwahr writes in his introduction to How to Hide an Empire: A History of the Greater United States, his new book on the United States’ overseas empire. Triumphalist accounts of the U.S.’s rise to superpower status usually begin with World War II: Pearl Harbor roused the sleeping giant to save the world from fascism. But if the United States had been sleeping, it was only a brief nap after a vigorous workout. From the early 19th century through the 20th, the U.S. assembled a sprawling overseas empire, which grew to include the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Guam, Hawaii, Alaska, the Panama Canal Zone, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and American Samoa, comprising millions of colonial subjects. This story resists a happy moral arc.
U.S. imperial rule was defined at various times by neglect, patronizing racism, and brutal military campaigns. As Immerwhar writes, people in the territories were “shot, shelled, starved, interned, dispossessed, tortured, and experimented on. What they haven’t been, by and large, is seen.” He aims to correct this state of affairs by telling U.S. history from the point of view of the territories. While many commentators on U.S. empire have sought to shock Americans out of what the historian Niall Ferguson has called America’s “imperial denial” by focusing searing attention on its misdeeds, Immerwahr’s book is not primarily an exposé. He often deploys the good-natured quirkiness of a TED-talker; the book is full of pop-culture references and interesting anecdotes that challenge common sense. Immerwahr’s point is not to condemn empire but to explain it. And by doing so, he helps us better understand American foreign and military policy in the present — and the future.
The founders imagined the U.S. as an empire, despite the country’s revolutionary beginnings. “I am persuaded no constitution was ever before so well calculated as ours for extensive empire and self government,” wrote Thomas Jefferson. The country expanded by acquiring territories, which were ruled by the federal government with absolute authority, much like colonies. The residents of these territories — Native Americans, Catholics, free blacks, and unruly squatters — were seen as an alien threat to the white, Protestant utopia the founders hoped to create. The idea was for the government to orchestrate the orderly settlement of the territories before they became states, but this plan, in Immerwhar’s telling, was overwhelmed by rapid population growth, which sent settlers surging over the Appalachian Mountains in the mid-1800s. As settlers literally raced for land on horseback at the shot of a pistol, the native people who already lived there were driven into ever smaller territories and reservations.
Continental expansion provided material and ideological justification for overseas expansion. In order to feed the still-booming population on the continent, the U.S. annexed its first overseas territories in 1857: a few hundred tiny islands covered in guano, a valuable source of fertilizer at the time. At the same time, the settling of the American west led to the romanticization of the frontier. Where the founders had fretted over early settlers, afraid they might start wars with the native peoples or infringe on property rights (George Washington held considerable land in the territories), the frontiersman Daniel Boone was rescued from obscurity and made into a national hero by the mid-19th century. In the late 1800s, the historian Frederick Jackson Turner famously argued that the struggle to settle the frontier had shaped the national character into one of resourceful individualism, which laid the groundwork for American democracy itself.
One person who caught frontier fever was the young Theodore Roosevelt. Roosevelt was East Coast royalty, but spent much of his youth gallivanting out west, building a myth of himself as a frontiersman by writing books with titles like Hunting Trips of a Ranchman. Roosevelt was also an insatiable warmonger who crowed that “the most ultimately righteous of all wars is a war with savages.” A photo included in Immerwahr’s book of a 20-something Roosevelt posing stiffly in a buckskin suit with his hands gripped around a rifle suggests his obsession with belligerent manliness may have been a form of overcompensation. (“Give a sissy a gun and he will kill everything in sight,” is what Gore Vidal once wrote of Roosevelt.) By the 1890s, the frontier had been closed on the continent, but Roosevelt was in luck, for the fading Spanish empire was in the process of brutally suppressing a rebellion in Cuba which, along with the sinking of the USS Maine, served as the pretext for the Spanish-American war.
With the victory over the Spanish in 1898, and the subsequent acquisition of the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam, the colonies took the place of the western frontier as the blank space on which to project American ambitions to shape a new world. The empire was memorialized in songs and books, while Americans hung redrawn maps on their walls and flocked to the “First Greater America Colonial Exposition” in Omaha, where a group of Filipinos thrilled the crowd with a rendition of “There’ll Be a Hot Time in the Old Town Tonight.” The famed architect Daniel Burnham, designer of the Flatiron Building, was commissioned to redesign Manila’s public spaces, and built an imperial complex in neoclassical style outside of the capital, modeling it after the hill stations where British colonizers cooled off in the summers.
Americans who shouldered the White Man’s Burden often took advantage of the colonies’ second-class status to carry out ambitious schemes free from regulations and public scrutiny on the mainland. American doctors and researchers used Puerto Rico as a giant laboratory in which ethics often fell by the wayside. One particularly egregious case Immerwhar brings to light is that of Dr. Cornelius P. Rhoads. Sent to Puerto Rico to help with a hookworm epidemic, he had to flee after it was revealed he’d written a letter to an American associate filled with racist vitriol, in which he seemingly confessed to murdering eight Puerto Ricans and “transplanting cancer into several more” to help bring about the genocide which, he wrote, would be the only way to save the island. While it was never proven that Rhoads actually killed anyone — he later claimed he was joking — it still seems a bit odd that Rhoads had a prestigious oncology award at Sloan-Kettering named after him until 2003.
The triumphant mood changed quickly after 1898. Although the U.S. had easily defeated the Spanish, it was soon bogged down in a war against its former ally in the Philippines, the nationalist Emilio Aguinaldo, who had been led to believe that he would be recognized as the leader of a newly independent nation after helping America defeat Spain. Unfortunately for Aguinaldo, when an ambivalent President William McKinley asked God what to do with the islands, the big guy told him to keep them, and to “educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them,” as McKinley recounted in a speech. Aguinaldo turned on his new imperial master.
The Philippine–American war was waged through the same erratic strategy of wanton violence plus ham-fisted attempts to make nice with the natives that would define future counterinsurgency campaigns. When they weren’t building roads or improving sanitation, U.S. soldiers burned farmland to the ground, waterboarded prisoners, and rounded up villages suspected of harboring insurgents in “reconcentration camps.” The war is estimated to have killed 4,196 U.S. troops and 775,000 Filipinos, a staggeringly lopsided body count which betrays the American tendency to visit mass destruction on civilians and combatants alike.
After insurgents killed 45 U.S. troops in an ambush in the town of Balangiga, on the southern island of Samar, American soldiers rampaged through the countryside, burning rice and buildings in revenge. “The interior of Samar must be made a howling wilderness,” said General Jacob H. Smith of the occupying forces. “I want no prisoners. I wish you to kill and burn, the more you kill and burn the better you will please me.” The atrocities sparked outrage at home, fueling a growing anti-imperialist movement. A century before the Iraq War awakened many Americans to the hypocrisy of conquering a people in order to free them, Mark Twain exposed the contradiction in biting commentaries. “There must be two Americas,” he wrote, “one that sets the captive free, and one that takes a once-captive’s new freedom away from him, and picks a quarrel with him with nothing to found it on.”
Today, the Philippine–American War has largely been forgotten. Reading about it, I wondered why it is not remembered better among the many other instances in which American values were starkly undermined by the actual conduct of Americans working in their name. A year before the controversy around the Confederate monument in Charlottesville erupted into a national firestorm, the return of six bells looted by U.S. soldiers from Balangiga barely warranted a mention in the press. The memory of the Philippine–American War is not so forgotten in the Philippines, where a recent blockbuster biopic of the young Filipino general Antonio Luna portrayed his American adversaries as “pompous xenophobes,” according to one review. Perhaps the election of Duterte, whose flagrant disregard for human rights and rabid anti-Americanism has bewildered many observers in the U.S., is a resurfacing of the Philippines’ traumatic colonial past.
Why are so few Americans aware of this history? How to Hide an Empire shows that many of the events that happened in the colonies are not remembered today because they were not deemed important at the time by the people who told memorable stories. This might seem like common sense, but the way we talk about historical “amnesia” suggests a past in which the facts were clear. At its best, Immerwahr’s book describes not only a forgotten history but a history of forgetting itself, as when Franklin Roosevelt removed prominent mention of a simultaneous Japanese attack on the Philippines from his famous address to congress after Pearl Harbor. As Immerwahr points out, FDR likely made the calculation that Americans wouldn’t care as much about this island nation halfway across the world, compared to the one that was closer and more culturally aligned.
American imperial history was further suppressed during the Cold War, when the idea that the U.S. might be anything but a champion of democracy was almost solely propagated domestically by leftist critics of U.S. foreign policy. It was not hard for many people to imagine empire-building as a brief and unimportant blip in the history of the country. After all, the formal empire was largely dissolved after World War II, as part of the wider move toward decolonization among the developing world. Alaska and Hawaii became states. Puerto Rico gained semi-autonomy as a commonwealth. The Philippines, which had been occupied by the Japanese and suffered horrific destruction, gained independence.
Yet, in Immerwahr’s telling, America’s empire did not disappear — it transformed. The U.S. “reshuffled its imperial portfolio” from large swaths of land to a string of military bases around the world, many of which are located in former imperial holdings. The U.S. became what he calls a “pointillist empire,” where military power is projected across the globe from hundreds of small patches of land. For Immerwahr, this transformation poses the puzzling question of why, at the height of its power, the U.S. decided to divest itself of all but a scattering of its territorial holdings. He argues that the rise of the global anti-colonial movement abroad and the civil rights movement at home made ruling imperial subjects politically impossible. At the same time, a series of innovations largely spearheaded by the U.S. military during World War II made it possible to reap many of the benefits of empire without undertaking colonization. These “empire-killing technologies” included advancements in communications, logistics, synthetics, and transportation which allowed U.S. troops and commerce to flow across the world as if it was all occupied territory.
In Immerwahr’s telling, these technologies helped bring about a world where globalization replaced colonization as “the great coordinating process.” Market dominance replaced military might as the crux of American power. The U.S. came out on top because economic and technological advantages gained in World War II allowed it to outcompete other countries. He gives the example of how American dominance of the airline industry led to the virus-like spread of English throughout the world via the vector of international air traffic controllers. As the book nears the present day, Immerwahr narrates a number of interesting stories from far-flung U.S. military installations (did you know the Beatles were inspired by music they heard from U.S. troops stationed in Liverpool?), but the reader becomes increasingly curious about why, in an era of increasingly seamless globalization, the U.S. stationed troops, planes, and ships all around the world in the first place. Immerwahr’s hyperfocus on territory physically controlled by the U.S., which was so crucial in the first half of the 20th century, begins to seem myopic when he addresses the second.
The historian Alfred McCoy offers a more complete view in his short and clarifying recent book In the Shadows of the American Century. America maintained its network of military bases after World War II to fight the Cold War, something barely discussed in How to Hide an Empire. American military supremacy provided the backbone of the American-led post-war order of alliances, economic treaties, international governing bodies, and pliant leaders (often installed through clandestine activities or invasion) that the U.S. constructed in the name of defeating communism and making the world safe for democratic capitalism. Far from being made obsolete, American military might secured the conditions for the market-based globalization that Immerwahr suggests replaced it.
Still, stripping empire to its roots in the control of territory reveals how even as the nature of empire changes, the way in which it’s hidden remains much the same. In the fall of 1950, Puerto Rican nationalists staged a violent uprising to protest the continued U.S. rule of the territory. A pair of nationalists attempted to assassinate President Harry Truman while he was sleeping. While the surviving assailant railed against specific injustices of U.S. imperialism on the island, the New York Times dismissed the uprising as “one of those mad adventures that make no sense to outsiders.” Such obfuscation resembles the response to 9/11, when Osama Bin Laden’s long-standing resentment of America’s military presence in the Middle East was largely smothered by hyperpatriotic discourse in the U.S. that framed him solely as a madman who hated America “for our freedoms.” In both cases, the reality of empire was obscured to preserve what the historian William Appleman Williams once called America’s “grand illusion” that it might maintain a global empire, however informal, without fully confronting imperialism’s contradiction of America’s professed values of freedom and self-determination.
It shows, also, that the dilemma of empire is as pressing today as it was in Mark Twain’s time. Donald Trump has made a lot of noise about winding down wars and withdrawing from alliances, but, seen from the far reaches of the pointillist empire, all of it seems as hollow as most of the other noises that issue from his mouth. Trump has shown little inclination to dismantle the world-spanning military apparatus that underpins America’s (yes, increasingly shaky) global supremacy.
The administration’s latest budget features a $750 billion increase in military spending, much of which would presumably support the nearly 700 U.S. military installations maintained today. And Trump does not seem particularly reluctant to use American military power to dictate events abroad. He shockingly made the good decision to withdraw U.S. forces from the quagmire in Syria only to address the crisis in Venezuela with a reckless bellicosity that threatens to entangle those forces again. In his incessant hinting at military intervention in Venezuela, Trump brings to mind the arch-imperialist Teddy Roosevelt’s idea of “big-stick” diplomacy — though no one would accuse Trump of speaking softly. A military intervention in Venezuela in the name of democracy would be as hypocritical, and likely as disastrous, as the campaign in the Philippines that got Roosevelt so hot and bothered. Now is as good a time as ever to familiarize yourself with the history of U.S. imperialism, if only to remember what an asshole Teddy Roosevelt was.
Adrian Chen



Apr. 7, 2019
Republicans Are Trashing the Law to Keep Trump’s Taxes Secret

This week, the House Ways and Means Committee formally moved to obtain President Trump’s federal tax forms. This move, which ought to be a mere formality, has slipped immediately into a political and legal conflict. What is so striking about the episode is how little outcry Trump’s open defiance of the law has created. It is by now simply taken for granted that this president holds himself above legal accountability and that his party will support him to the hilt.
The law governing this matter is unusually clear. The Internal Revenue Code states, “Upon written request from the chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, the chairman of the Committee on Finance of the Senate, or the chairman of the Joint Committee on Taxation, the Secretary shall furnish such committee with any return or return information specified in such request.” This law has been used to examine tax returns of high-placed political officials. It was enacted in order to let Congress examine financial conflicts of interest by the administration, and forced the disclosure of a president’s tax returns (Richard Nixon).
News accounts describe this law as “obscure” or “little used,” which it is — but only because presidential candidates who receive a major-party nomination have habitually published their tax returns. It is a very strong norm that has made the law unnecessary. But the fact that the norm is backstopped by a law strengthens rather than weakens the case for enforcing it.
Trump recently told reporters, “From what I understand, the law’s 100 percent on my side.” The president declined to support this strident interpretation with any references to legal texts or other precedent, which is hardly surprising. Somewhat more unusually, his supporters have likewise failed to explain why the plain-text meaning of the law does not actually apply.
White House press secretary Sarah Sanders simply stated, “While his taxes continue to be under audit, he doesn’t anticipate that changing at any point anytime soon, and therefore doesn’t have any intention to release those returns.” Trump’s tax returns may or may not be under audit, but in any case, this has no bearing on a law allowing Congress to examine them.
Senator Charles Grassley, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, defended Trump’s defiance of the law in terms that made up in emotional intensity what they lacked in any legal basis. “[Democrats] dislike him with a passion, and they want his tax returns to destroy him,” Grassley said. “That’s all that this whole process is about, and it’s Nixonian to the core.”
These are not good reasons, but they are reasons, and it’s worth considering their meaning. It is surely true that Democrats in congress dislike Trump. However, that has no bearing on their standing to exercise a right to which the law entitles them unambiguously.
More interestingly, Grassley asserts that obtaining Trump’s tax filings would “destroy him.” It’s startling that Grassley believes not only that the information in Trump’s tax returns is so devastating it would destroy him, but that the proper response is to prevent this ruinous information from being made available to Congress or the public.
National Review’s David French concedes that Congress has a legal right to the tax returns while devoting almost the entirety of his argument to the proposition that the law is terrible and Trump is correct to defy it. His stated concern is not Trump, but the poor average taxpayer who might be targeted by meanies in Congress: “They can have your return, my return, or any political enemy’s return.”
This theory fails to explain why, if the law is so ripe and tempting for abuse, none of the people running Congress over the last 95 years — many of them quite ruthless — actually have used it to attack private citizens. In any case, even if you’re worried that the law is ripe for abuse, leaving it on the books and failing to use it to compel the president to do what all modern presidents have done is hardly a solution. It could still be used in the future to target private citizens.
If this scenario that hasn’t happened in 95 years is really so scary, congress could amend the law so that it only applies to the president, or perhaps members of the cabinet as well, which would satisfy the concerns about privacy. But nobody actually thinks Trump would support such a reform, because he obviously doesn’t care about privacy in the abstract at all. In both its motive and its application, Trump’s position has nothing to do with protecting average citizens and everything to do with protecting Trump.
Mere public disclosure is just about the most minimal step possible to constrain Trump’s massive financial conflicts of interest. It’s certainly far milder than forcing him to place his assets in a blind trust, as all presidents have willingly done for decades. Yet even that modest step goes too far for any Republican to abide. This fanatical opposition only makes the forbidden more tantalizing.
Last year, the New York Times examined state records and found a decades-long pattern of massive tax fraud by Trump and his father, in addition to the devastating revelation that Trump inherited at least $400 million. Other reporters have found extensive evidence that Trump’s income comes from abetting money laundering or dealing with criminals and dictators.
This would help explain the unusual diligence the president has applied toward this problem. The Times reported recently that Trump urged Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to speedily confirm his handpicked IRS chief counsel, Michael J. Desmond, even prioritizing his confirmation ahead of Attorney General William Barr. Trump generally takes little interest in the internal workings of government — his Defense Secretary resigned three and a half months ago, and Trump has taken no evident steps toward finding a replacement. He clearly cares a lot about having loyalists staffing the IRS.
Republicans are acting as though presidential tax returns have traditionally been kept private, and it is Democrats who wish to violate this sacred custom of secrecy. Obtaining Trump’s tax returns “sets a dangerous standard of having the federal government used as a political weapon” and is also “a waste of time,” asserts House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy. (The actual standard it would “set” would be that presidents have to disclose their tax information, which is what the standard was before Trump came along.)
“Democrats say they’re interested in the tax returns of all presidents when they’re really just interested in one: President Trump,” Grassley argues. (Of course Democrats are only interested in obtaining this president’s taxes — he’s the only one who’s refused to disclose them!) Grassley adds, “It’s motivated by the Democrats’ intense dislike of this president. It’s motivated by their frustration over losing an election that they thought they’d easily win. It’s motivated by their desire to use all of the resources at their disposal to find something — anything — to bring this president down.”
Grassley is fixating on the motivation of Congress to obtain Trump’s taxes, while ignoring Trump’s own motivation to hide them, so that he can steer the conversation away from the obvious solution — from the standpoint of both the public good and the letter of the law. This is the method Republicans have used to justify every debasement of norms and the law Trump has undertaken: Drain the question of any neutral principle and reduce it to a simple struggle of us versus them. And the more gross and unjustifiable Trump’s behavior, the more Democrats resent him, which gives Republicans all the more reason to defend him.
Maintaining the secrecy of Trump’s tax returns “is a hill and people would be willing to die on it … we will see you in court,” boasts an administration official. Legally, they haven’t got a leg to stand on. It’s telling that nobody in the administration or the Republican Party seems to care.
Jonathan Chait



Apr. 7, 2019
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen Quits Amid Pressure From Trump

Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen tendered her resignation on Sunday, joining a long line of top officials who have departed the Trump administration. Nielsen, who took over the department after former DHS head John Kelly left to become President Trump’s chief of staff in July of 2017, had been a regular target of criticism from the president, who once berated her so badly at a Cabinet meeting that she reportedly drafted a resignation letter. On Sunday, facing escalating pressure from Trump, she went all the way.
The change happened amid a worsening humanitarian crisis along parts of the southern U.S. border after waves of Central American migrants, fleeing violence and poor economic conditions, travelled north seeking entry to the U.S. That surge has overwhelmed U.S. authorities at the border.
Nielsen had set up a meeting with Trump on Sunday. According to the New York Times, “three people familiar with the meeting said Ms. Nielsen had requested it to plan “a way forward” at the border, in part thinking she could have a reasoned conversation with Mr. Trump about her role.”
In a statement announcing her decision after that meeting, Nielsen said she had determined that it was “the right time” for her to move on and hoped that “the next secretary will have the support of Congress and the courts in fixing the laws which have impeded our ability to fully secure America’s borders and which have contributed to discord in our nation’s discourse.”
Many had expected Trump to fire Nielsen, but rather than deploy his famous Apprentice catchphrase, the president seems to have decided to force her to quit instead. Among recent moves to marginalize Nielsen, Trump cut U.S. aid to El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras the day after she signed a regional compact with officials from the countries. (He had previously told her to cut the aid, not understanding that the State Department was responsible for foreign aid.) He also recently floated the idea of naming an “immigration czar” who would essentially take over parts of her job. By Sunday, Nielsen had apparently had enough.
Kevin McAleenan, who is currently the commissioner of the Customs and Border Protection agency, will replace Nielsen as acting head of the agency, Trump announced in a tweet. That makes McAleenan the fourth acting head atop the Trump administration. Other acting heads — who have not been confirmed by the Senate — are already in place as Defense secretary, Interior secretary, and White House chief of staff.
In what was likely a related move on Friday, President Trump withdrew his nominee to head the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, Ron Vitiello, citing the need to “go in a tougher direction.” Nielsen reportedly supported Vitiello.
According to CNN, Trump’s desire for a “tougher direction” came from Stephen Miller, the nativist policy adviser who is the architect of the Trump administration’s (anti-)immigration policies. The Times points out that Miller regularly complained about Nielsen, too.
Miller and Trump apparently blamed Nielsen for not finding more ways to to secure the border, though it’s not clear what non-border wall ideas the men had themselves. For her part, Nielsen was reportedly frustrated with the lack of support she received from other agencies to handle the migrants trying to enter the U.S. Per the Times, “the president berated Ms. Nielsen regularly, calling her at home early in the mornings to demand that she take action to stop immigrants from entering the country, including doing things that were clearly illegal, like blocking all immigrants from seeking asylum.”
She apparently responded with attempts to explain the rule of law, which undoubtedly enraged the authoritarian-minded president further still.
As Vox’s Dara Lind points out, Nielsen — who presided over the Trump administration’s objectively cruel policy of separating migrant families — was already arguably the most aggressive DHS head in the agency’s history, but it wasn’t enough for Trump, who seems to have blamed her for the reality of migration itself.
The president’s infamous tirade at Nielsen was reportedly over her refusal to close the border. Trump has repeatedly threatened to close the border, but the logistical and economic ramifications of doing so make it effectively impossible. Since Nielsen was undoubtedly one of the main administration officials who attempted to explain to Trump why he could not do something impossible, it was only a matter of time until he’d seek to replace her.
Whether McAleenan, a longtime border officer, will take a more hardline approach than Nielsen— if that’s even possible — remains unclear. He also might not hold the position for very long himself.
This post has updated throughout to reflect new information about a breaking news story. The headline originally stated that Nielsen had been fired, but she later said she had resigned. 
Chas Danner



Apr. 7, 2019
The Long-Term Damage of Trump’s War on Immigrants

On Friday, the Trump administration revealed that it may need up to two more years to identify thousands of migrant children who may have been separated from their families at the southern border. The depressing acknowledgement, made a full year after the separation policy was originally announced, underlines the long-term impact of one of the Trump administration’s most shameful acts. It also demonstrates how ill-equipped the government is when it comes to dealing with the consequences of Trump’s reckless war on immigrants.
In a Friday night court filing, the Justice Department claimed it would need at least a year, and as much as two years, to analyze the roughly 47,000 cases of unaccompanied minors taken into federal custody from July 2017 to June 2018, when U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw ordered both an end to the separations, and that the children be reunited with their families.
It’s still not clear exactly how many children were taken from family members at the border over that period, and it might not be until after the 2020 elections. At the time of Sabraw’s ruling against the separations, about  2,700 children were in federal custody as a result of the policy, but a watchdog report released in January by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services indicated that thousands of additional families may also have been separated at the border, starting months before the Trump administration announced the policy. After the ACLU convinced Judge Sabraw that those additional children should be added to his reunification order, he told the Trump administration to submit a proposal on how to address the problem.
That proposal listed several complications to justify the long time frame, chief among them the massive number of cases to review, which the administration claims it does not have the resources to do manually. Instead, a multi-agency team plans to run a statistical analysis of the tens of thousands of cases in an attempt to determine which children were most likely to have been separated from their families through the policy. Cases flagged by the analysis would then receive manual review. The government says that the still unknown number of additional children had already been released into the care of sponsors before the judges’ June order, and that the U.S. Customs and Border Patrol didn’t create a searchable database tracking the children until April 19 of last year — meaning there is no easy way to search the cases of children taken into custody before then.
The ACLU, which has been waging a legal fight against the government on behalf of the affected families, quickly rejected the Trump administration’s time frame. The organization’s lead attorney in the case, Lee Gelernt, told CNN on Saturday that the ACLU would “strongly oppose any plan that would give the government up to two years to find these children” and that the Trump administration needed to do more moving forward:
They won’t, or at least not voluntarily.
The Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” policy toward migrants mandated that all undocumented adults crossing the border face criminal prosecution and be placed in federal custody even if they were traveling with children. The official line from the Trump administration and its allies was that the policy was about following the letter of the law, but it was really meant to discourage migrants from wanting to ever come to the U.S. in the first place. To that end, the cruelty of the separations, magnified by the administration’s incompetence in implementing them, and the publicity the policy and the resulting crisis inevitably received were very much the point. And that was despite evidence that the policy would actually deter would-be migrants in the first place, and over all, Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric appears to have had the opposite effect.
From the very start of Trump’s presidency, nativist hardliners in the White House like policy adviser Stephen Miller have worked to implement as many anti-immigration measures as possible, both to appeal to Trump’s anti-immigrant base, and, as a larger goal, to ruin America’s long-standing reputation as a nation of immigrants. Migrant children weren’t just collateral damage in this ongoing war on immigrants — they were intended damage.
Regardless of how long it takes the Trump administration to account for, let alone address, the full scale of that harm, it may be irreparable, as this new HuffPost report explains:
Furthermore, if the intended purpose of the separation policy, or any of the administration’s other anti-immigrant efforts, was to deter migrants — it’s failed spectacularly. A decade-high number of migrants have tried to make the journey to and over the southern U.S. border in recent months, a surge which many immigration experts believe was prompted by Trump’s ever-present anti-immigrant rhetoric and repeated empty threats to close the border.
Thanks to deliberately intolerant policies, incompetent or negligent leadership, and an overwhelming burden on under-resourced U.S. agencies, Trump has created a real humanitarian crisis at the southern border in place of the fake security crisis he and his allies conjured for their rise to power.
The border crisis, like most crises, can only be solved by good governance, evidence-based policy, resources, and compassion — which is another way of saying that it won’t be solved by the current administration. And even if Trump could address the problem with something other than a fantastic wall, why would he want to?
Crisis and chaos, real or imagined, have often worked to Trump’s political advantage. It’s already more than clear that the Trump will triple-down on immigrant scaremongering as a central pitch in his reelection campaign. In that sense, it’s a good political strategy to break the immigration system, overwhelm the asylum system, highlight the chaos, blame Democrats for the lack of a wall to contain it, and scramble all other news cycles with the outraged crossfire.
On his signature issue of immigration and border security, President Trump is running for reelection on the effectiveness of his sabotage. If he loses, the damage will be his legacy, and the intolerable aftermath of the child separation policy is a preview of what it will be like as we try to pick up the pieces.
Chas Danner



Apr. 7, 2019
Will Iowans Dump Disgraced Racist Steve King?

It’s tough getting yourself denounced for racism by today’s Republican Party, a place where it often seems racism is only attributed to people who call it out among poor, pitiful, persecuted white folks. But Iowa congressman Steve King, by sheer persistence, succeeded in getting himself cast into the outer darkness by the powers that be in his party, as the New York Times recently noted:
Iowa Republicans, including both U.S. senators and Governor Kim Reynolds, joined in condemning King, who for years strode through Iowa GOP politics as an iconic, if always edgy, figure of angry conservatism. These pooh-bahs sent an implicit signal to ambitions Republican pols in King’s conservative district that taking him out in a 2020 primary would be a welcome development. They built it, and the candidates have come:
Feenstra is focusing less on King’s racism, than on the influence the district has lost because of the egregious nature of that racism:
It’s a shrewd if amoral approach. Iowa has always treasured its bipartisan clout in Washington to an unusual extent. King lost his state and district a prized position on the House Agriculture Committee. Even constituents who don’t mind their member of Congress insulting people of color on a regular basis frown at the recklessness that forfeited actual power (fortunately for Iowa, freshman Democrat Cindy Axne was appointed to the Ag Committee).
King’s pariah status in Washington has, however, given him a lot of time to focus on his district (a Washington Post reporter followed King around the Capitol and environs recently, and found he didn’t have much to do). Often an indifferent fund-raiser and campaigner, King’s now on fire:
And now that he’s firmly identified as an extremist, he seems liberated to let it all hang out:
In his primary, King will be appealing to ideology over influence, at a time when Donald Trump could well be helping him by whipping up conservatives into a fear/hate frenzy. His 4th congressional district gave Trump 61 percent of its vote in 2016, so the ground is fertile for King-style fury, even though it contradicts every convention of Iowa Nice.
If King survives his primary, Democrats could give him a run for his money, too, particularly if 2018 opponent J. D. Scholten, who came within less than 11,000 votes of upsetting the incumbent last year, runs again. Ultimately it will come down to whether a majority of western Iowa voters love Steve King enough to proudly share his shame.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 6, 2019
Netanyahu Vows to Annex West Bank, Never Allow Palestinian State, If Reelected

Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on Saturday that he would annex parts of the Israeli occupied West Bank if he is reelected, and made it clear that he would reject Palestinian statehood in any form, arguing that it would “endanger our existence.” The announcement, made during a television interview, was clearly made to attract support from Israel’s far-right, including voters at the polls on April 9, as well as smaller more hard-line political parties that could help Netanyahu form a coalition government if his Likud party fails to win a majority in Israel’s parliament. On Friday, final polls showed that Netanyahu, who is also facing corruption charges, was trailing his centrist challenger Benny Gantz.
Regarding just how much, if not all, of the West Bank Netanyahu would annex, he promised to “extend sovereignty” over all Israeli settlements in the territory, regardless of how isolated they were. Beyond that, he seemed to imply Israel was entitled to do whatever it wants, and that no Israeli would ever be subject to Palestinian sovereignty.
It is also possible that Netanyahu is making an empty election-eve promise that he’ll later find some reason to back out of.  But even if that is the case, his wide-reaching rhetoric won’t soon be forgotten, and the same political forces which have made Netanyahu embrace harder and harder lines will remain.
Roughly 2.8 million Palestinians live in the West Bank under the control of the Israeli military, and some 400,000 Israelis live in the territory in settlements which are illegal under international law — as would be their annexation by Israel, since the territory was acquired by war. The settlements have also been the most contentious sticking point in the peace negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian leaders, and the talks have remained stalled since 2014. Pro-settler political forces in Israel, meanwhile, have continued to gain influence and seek the annexation of the West Bank settlements. Ten years ago, Netanyahu was one of the politicians who rejected that minority view and supported a two-state solution.
A lot has changed since then, particularly in the White House, where a new administration has taken a starkly different stance to Israel than its predecessor. President Trump and his administration’s pro-Netanyahu policies have enabled and emboldened the Israeli leader and his rightward lurch, and that definitely includes the West Bank vow. On Saturday, Netanyahu boasted that Trump’s recognition of Israel’s claim to sovereignty over the Golan Heights region — itself an unprecedented break with decades of U.S. policy — was proof that the U.S. would back him and the West Bank annexation. According to one news report, Netanyahu didn’t even consider asserting sovereignty over the West Bank settlements until after Trump’s Golan Heights decision, and he was certain Trump “would give him backing and legitimization” for the subsequent move once the long-expected U.S. peace proposal was released and inevitably rejected by the Palestinians.
Palestinian negotiators have boycotted contact with the Trump administration since it, in another break with longtime policy, moved the U.S. embassy to Jerusalem and recognized the city as the country’s capital, enraging Palestinians, who also consider the city their capital. It’s not clear what Trump himself understands about the region’s history, especially after his speech to the Republican Jewish Coalition on Saturday:
“Such a statement by Netanyahu is not surprising,” Dr. Saeb Erekat, a top Palestinian official, said in response to the prime minister’s comments on Saturday. “Israel will continue to brazenly violate international law for as long as the international community will continue to reward Israel with impunity, particularly with the Trump administration’s support and endorsement of Israel’s violation of the national and human rights of the people of Palestine.”
Trump has teased the long-promised U.S. peace proposal as the “deal of the century,” but it will undoubtedly be as Netanyahu-sided as everything else the Trump administration has done when it comes to Israel. And if Netanyahu wins reelection to his fourth consecutive term on Tuesday, and with Trump’s blessing, goes forward with annexing the West Bank settlements, the two-state solution will almost certainly be dead for good.
Chas Danner



Apr. 6, 2019
At Famed Civil-Rights Center, Fire Destroys a Building, But Not a Mission

When the governor of Tennessee revoked the Highlander Research and Education Center’s charter in 1961, its founder, Myles Horton, said he wasn’t worried about the future of the civil-rights institution. “My friend here, he thinks he’s padlocking Highlander,” he explained to a reporter 20 years later. “But Highlander is an idea. You can’t padlock an idea.”
Horton was right. Highlander survived, even thrived. The idea at the heart of the Highlander — to organize the South for civil rights — drew activists like Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King Jr., and Representative John Lewis to its workshops and training sessions. The same idea has long made the center the focus of attacks from segregationists and other factions of the far-right.
Now Highlander’s supporters fear that someone may have targeted the center again. On March 29, a fire destroyed the center’s main office building in New Market, Tennessee. Days later, the center and local authorities confirmed that staff had discovered a symbol associated with white supremacy in a parking lot. Jefferson County sheriff Jeff Coffey described it as “the hashtag symbol”; a photograph from the scene published in the Knoxville News Sentinel shows three vertical lines crossed with three horizontal lines, drawn in black spray paint on the pavement. The symbol originated with the Iron Guard, a fascist group active in Romania in the ’30s and ’40s, and it’s been resurrected by some contemporary right-wing extremists. The Christchurch mosque shooter drew the mark on his rifle, and it was used by members of the recently disbanded Traditionalist Worker Party, a white-nationalist group. The Jefferson County Sheriff’s Department says its investigation into the symbol and the fire is ongoing.
Ash-Lee Henderson, a native of east Tennessee and the first black woman to become Highlander’s executive director, believes the incident may be connected to a “growing” global white-power movement. “Their presence has been more overt so that more and more people are seeing it, whether the attacks in technocratic terms have been increasing or not,” she told New York.
Highlander has been working to oppose these forces since it was founded in 1932, as the Highlander Folk School. Though it initially provided vocational training to adults in Grundy County, Tennessee, Myles Horton had political ambitions for his new school, too. “Their founding documents basically state that they wanted to create a new social order in the South,” explained Emily Senefeld, a visiting lecturer in history at Sewanee, the University of the South. That new social order had a distinctly left-wing shape. In its early years, the center helped train labor activists and played an integral role in helping to desegregate the trade-union movement.
As a consequence, anti-communists began smearing the school within months of its creation. “Even in the late 1930s, Highlander was being targeted by the House Un-American Activities Committee long before the better known investigations of the 1950s,” she said, referring to probes by the governments of Georgia, Arkansas, and Tennessee. By that point, the center had begun training and hosting civil-rights activists, including John Lewis.
“It was at the Highlander Folk School that I shared a meal for the first time in my life in an integrated setting. I was a young adult, but I had never eaten a meal in the company of black and white diners,” Representative Lewis, a Georgia Democrat, explained in a statement shared with New York. Highlander, he added, was where Rosa Parks “witnessed a demonstration of equality that helped inspire her to keep her seat on a Montgomery bus, just a few days after her first visit.”
Henderson, the center’s executive director, describes Highlander as part of a broader southern freedom movement, which has gained strength even as white nationalists grew their own networks. “There’s this long and radical legacy of resistance, like the black liberation movement, which some people call the civil-rights movement. That was rooted in the South. Even before that, the struggle to abolish slavery obviously is a southern story. And we won some victories there,” Henderson said, laughing.
Faced with a decades-old smear campaign, the center has repeatedly proven its resilience. After the state of Tennessee confiscated Highlander’s Monteagle property in 1961, the school renamed itself the Highlander Education and Research Center, and moved first to Knoxville and then to its current location in rural New Market. Though its name and location have changed, the character of its work remains roughly the same. Today the center helps fund the STAY Project, which supports young environmental and civil-rights activists in central Appalachia, along with National Bail Out Collective, which coordinates bail for incarcerated low-income people, and the Power U Center for Social Change, which works with youth of color in Miami, Florida.
If March’s fire turns out to be a hate crime, there doesn’t appear to be a specific, catalyzing moment to explain why someone would attack the center now. Highlander is doing what Highlander has always done. But broader trends may offer an explanation. Nationally, hate crimes are on the rise. In 2018, the FBI reported that rates of reported hate crimes increased 17 percent from 2017. (The real figure is almost certainly higher, as many victims don’t report hate crimes.) Since President Trump took office, white-nationalist violence has claimed lives in a number of high-profile incidents, from Heather Heyer’s death in Charlottesville, Virginia, to the killing of 11 worshippers in a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, synagogue. Members of Atomwaffen Division, a neo-Nazi group, have been linked to five murders nationwide. There have been other near misses, like the arrest of Christopher Hasson, a Coast Guard lieutenant who reportedly dreamed of a “white homeland” and had a kill list.
Meanwhile, the Trump administration has taken steps that reduce the government’s focus on white-nationalist violence as a security threat. Weeks before the violence in Charlottesville, the Department of Homeland Security rescinded a grant to Life After Hate, a nonprofit that helps individuals transition out of white-nationalist organizations. Just this week, the Daily Beast reported that sometime last year the Department of Homeland Security disbanded a group of analysts that focused on domestic terrorism. (DHS disputed the notion that it’s reduced its commitment to “defeating all forms of radical ideology — including white supremacist and domestic terrorist,” telling the Daily Beast that’s “patently false and the exact opposite of what we have done.”)
Though white nationalists have always been active in east Tennessee, there’s now some evidence of increased activity. Before the Traditionalist Worker Party dissolved last year, its founder, Matthew Heimbach, was spotted repeatedly in Knoxville. He counterprotested the Knoxville Women’s March in January 2018, then held a talk on the campus of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, the following month. A cached version of a Twitter account under Heimbach’s name — which was created in February and may have been deleted earlier this week — shows his location as Tennessee, though it doesn’t specify the town. (A source familiar with the matter told New York that Twitter did not take action on the Heimbach account.) Knoxville Radical Alliance, a local anti-fascist group, posted images of masked fascists marching in the area last weekend, and referenced a newly formed fascist group. A website for the group, which calls itself the Legion of St. Ambrose and uses Orthodox Christian imagery, appeared earlier this year. Flyers from the TWP and Identity Evropa, another white-nationalist organization that has since attempted to rebrand itself, have been discovered on the campus of East Tennessee State University in Johnson City.
Henderson said that Highlander hasn’t received any recent threats, though Monica Hernandez, who worked at the center for a decade before she became the founding president of the Tennessee Immigrant & Refugee Rights Coalition, recalled receiving threatening email and hate mail before she left in 2011. “There was some activity that we were aware of, with white supremacists in the area,” she added. “We were always super vigilant.”
For now, Highlander’s staff and supporters are waiting for the investigation to conclude. Henderson told New York that they haven’t yet been able to access the burned building and assess their losses. “What we do know is that it is unlikely that we didn’t lose some historic documents that we kept in the building,” she said. “What we know we lost for sure is some of the other, just as powerful memorabilia that we had in the office. Cards that people sent us thanking us for being who we are to movements. Pictures that our children drew. Things that we brought from our homes to remind us of how this place is also a home for so many, including our staff and participants.”
Despite these losses, Henderson says that the center intends to break ground on the construction of a new library, named for civil-rights icon Septima Clark. Hernandez says she believes that Highlander will continue to thrive. The fire, she said, “is a warning to all of us that we need to be alert.”
“But I know the spirit of Highlander,” she added. “I know it’s beloved by thousands of people here and all over the world. I know the mission will continue, and it will flourish.”
Sarah Jones



Apr. 6, 2019
Bernie Sanders Still Dragging His Feet on Releasing His Tax Returns

At a time when the longstanding chorus of Democratic demands to see Donald Trump’s tax returns is reaching a crescendo (and extending into congressional requests to the IRS for the documents), there’s a bit of an embarrassing sideshow going on. One of the top candidates for the nomination to oppose Trump, Bernie Sanders, has been conspicuously dragging his feet on disclosing his own tax returns, for years.
The saga has been going on for a good while, as CNN reports:
A former Clinton campaign spokesman, Brian Fallon, took a dim view of how Sanders handled the issue in 2016:
In February, Sanders said he’d release a decade of past returns “sooner rather than later.” More recently, he somewhat vaguely pointed to the April 15 federal tax filing deadline and said he’d release the old returns “very shortly” after that.
So what’s going on? There are, of course, rumors he and/or his wife are hiding something fishy.  A sympathetic progressive observer, Ryan Grim, thinks it could have to do with the entirely legitimate money Sanders made on his most recent book, which might be embarrassing strictly because it lifted his income into the ranks of the well-off. But Grim also thinks it’s a symptom of a larger Sanders problem of inflexibility:
There’s even an argument being made one prominent socialist that Bernie’s insistent critique of the rich and privileged means he should be immune from criticism on such mundane things as tax documents:
While it’s true nobody thinks that Sanders’ tax returns will expose him as a Wall Street stooge, the claim that he should be held to a lower standard of disclosure than anyone else isn’t going to fly.
To be clear, Sanders is far from being the only 2020 candidate who hasn’t released his tax returns: only four, Elizabeth Warren, Jay Inslee, Kirsten Gillibrand, and Amy Klobuchar, have done so. But he’s been fighting this step for longer than anyone else, so his case is the most frustrating for Democrats battling to force the release of Trump’s returns.
If Grim is right and it really is just a matter of stubbornness, Sanders should get over it. Otherwise suspicions that it’s something else will only grow.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 6, 2019
Whatever Happened to the Israeli Left?
On the eve of the Jewish state’s elections, an appraisal of the battered opposition.
Barreling down a barely existent road in the South Hebron Hills, as I sit in the passenger seat of Nasser Nawaja’s well-worn Dacia Duster, the conversation turns to the fate of the Holy Land. “Do you have more or less hope now than you did ten years ago?” I ask Nawaja, a veteran Palestinian activist from this rural stretch of the Israeli-occupied West Bank. A pause. A laugh. “Little bit less hope,” he admits. “Ten years ago, more hope. Ten years ago, I see a lot of Israeli active. But now?”
At a loss for English words, he jumps into Hebrew to make himself clear — his first tongue is Arabic, but he shares the Jewish state’s official language with his other passenger, an Israeli Jewish 30-something named Avner Gvaryahu. The latter is one of the perhaps-crazy few still carrying out the work of the Israeli anti-occupation left. He is a former combat soldier who says he served in this very spot during the bloody early-aughts Palestinian-Israeli clash known as the Second Intifada. He now works for a much-demonized activist organization of repentant Israeli ex-combatants called Breaking the Silence, and that group brought him into the orbit of Nawaja, who documents and appeals against military demolitions of legally disputed rural Palestinian communities.
After Nawaja laments in Hebrew, Gvaryahu speaks, and it’s unclear where the translation of his friend ends and his own thoughts begin: “I mean, what happened after the Second Intifada was that, on the one hand, there was a moment of breakdown for this kumbaya peace,” he says. “Meeting, eating hummus, getting to know each other in hotels — that broke down.” The Second Intifada — a clash that lasted from 2000 to 2005 and consisted of asymmetrical warfare from the Palestinians and military might from the Israelis — was unleashed after a left-leaning Israeli administration’s failure to secure peace, and thus played a key part in discrediting dovishness. “But,” Gvaryahu says, “alongside that, there was a core of Israeli activists that realized, this is our moment to stand with our Palestinian friends.” However, even though Gvaryahu cites a few small, hard-won victories in recent years, it’s clear that he’s aware of the dearth of progress on the foundational question of Israel, the one that peppers the air you breathe while discussing this oft-vilified nation-state: how to resolve the hatreds between Israeli Jews and indigenous Arabs.
On April 9, the remarkably blatant inequality of the political status quo will be once again on display. Israeli citizens will swarm the polls for a pivotal national election that will determine the makeup of their Parliament and, as a result, who will be their prime minister. Meanwhile, 5 million–odd Palestinians who are directly or indirectly governed by Israeli military law will get no opportunity to select the people who make the ultimate decisions about their lives, deaths, status, and future. More than 5 million Jews dwell between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea, forming a majority alongside a Palestinian minority within Israel’s U.N.-recognized borders — but who are now also forming a growing and politically ascendant minority in the Palestinian-dense West Bank, which Israel occupies and allows (in some cases encourages) Jewish settling of, in defiance of international law.
Jewish settlers of the West Bank can vote in Israeli elections, but Palestinians there cannot, nor can those of the blockaded Gaza Strip, another Palestinian territory Israel first captured during a 1967 war. The roughly 1.6 million Palestinians in the territory of Israel proper can vote, but live with well-documented legal inequality. In American politics, this state of affairs is inevitably discussed when the country comes up. As the recent fracas over Congresswoman Ilhan Omar’s criticisms of pro-Israel lobbying demonstrated, the policy agenda of the Israeli government is a specter that howls ever louder while it haunts the Jewish state’s superpower patron.
And yet, surreally enough, the Palestinian Question has been all but unuttured in the tiny nation’s election season. The race has been brutal, dirty, and largely focused on voters’ personal feelings about the Likud Party’s Benjamin Netanyahu, the allegedly corrupt prime minister who has been in power for the last decade. But neither he nor the political novice leading the charge against him, retired general Benny Gantz, is willing to even entertain following through on Israel’s occasional promise to permit the West Bank and Gaza to form an independent Palestinian state. Gantz is characterizing himself and his cobbled-together party, Blue and White, as ideologically centrist and thus slightly to the left of the hard-right Netanyahu coalition, which has increasingly pushed for West Bank settlements, ethnic division, and religious orthodoxy.
The two men are a nanometer away from one another in the polls, and while Netanyahu runs ads suggesting a Gantz victory would end Netanyahu’s ten-odd years of forcefully repressing Palestinian violence, Gantz boasts of how he bombed sections of Gaza “back to the Stone Age.” Leading Netanyahu allies openly speak of formally annexing parts of the West Bank, a proposal that once was beyond the pale in mainstream discourse. A viciously racist political party whose leaders have called for the expulsion of Palestinian citizens of Israel deemed disloyal has been offered provisional membership in a Netanyahu coalition. Meanwhile, “leftist” has become a potent slur applied even to centrists like Gantz and his party mate Yair Lapid, and the failures of past stabs at peace have led progressive candidates to shove their anti-occupation messages to the side.
In other words, I’m unsurprised by the answers Nawaja and Gvaryahu deliver when I ask them whether they think things might change if Gantz beats Netanyahu. “Both no change anything,” Nawaja bluntly intones, then slips into Hebrew. Gvaryahu picks up: “I’ll translate and then I’ll also say that I agree,” he tells me. “Nasser says that, when it comes to this issue, there isn’t right or left or center. Everyone is right.”
It certainly looks that way from the vantage point of many American Jews. Though polling data suggests that most Jewish people in the United States still feel attached to Israel in one way or another, criticism of the country from within the U.S. Jewish community has reached unprecedented levels. Today’s Israel is one that has largely embraced Donald Trump, a man whom American Jewry voted against at a rate of roughly 80 percent and who many of them believe is himself an anti-Semite. Horror about recent state violence against Gazans has spurred the growth in stature of stridently anti-occupation Jewish groups like IfNotNow, Jewish Voice for Peace, and the Jewish Solidarity Caucus. American universities — which Jews are disproportionately likely to attend — are hotbeds of the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movement that seeks to ensure Palestinian rights through international ostracization of Israel and its inhabitants. As this younger generation enters the spotlight, we stand at the verge of one of the greatest schisms in the millennia-long history of the Jewish people.
Which brings us back to the flabby Diasporan in the passenger seat. I am the sort of Jew that the present Israeli government has more or less written off. I make no secret of my lefty leanings. My religious practice isn’t orthodox. I have no family in Israel or the West Bank and have no intention of becoming an Israeli myself (despite the fact that Israeli law would make that wildly easy for me, given my blood). To add insult to injury, I’m a journalist — a job that Netanyahu regularly attacks with Trumpian bile.
And yet, like many an American Yid before me, I’ve become obsessed with Israel. In recent years, I’ve started making regular trips to the region that American leftists increasingly refer to as “Israel/Palestine” — a descriptive but provocative term that arguably concedes some legitimacy to the Palestinian-solidarity activists who refuse to recognize Israel. Given my social circles, I always feel somewhat queasy about going. I’m aware that there are those in the BDS camp who might see me as a reactionary for even setting foot in Israel, which they often portray as a rogue ethnostate that can only be changed through outside pressure and revolutionary change. Such people believe the left in Israel is at best a lost cause and at worst an active enabler of injustice.
Their dispute is often not with individual Israeli policies so much as with Zionism, the hard-to-summarize ideology that advocates for Jewish self-determination and is the very basis of the Israeli state. Though such radicals may see the value in certain strains of non-statist, Arab-inclusive Zionism that existed before the establishment of Israel in 1948, they damn the mainstream Zionism of today as an ideology of Jewish supremacy and apartheid that must be overthrown. In the U.S., Zionism is a word that becomes increasingly radioactive the farther left you go on the spectrum. But in Israel, the average left-leaning individual — provided that they’re Jewish — still identifies as Zionist. How could they not? To be otherwise, they feel, is to wish suicide for their own country. It is a bridge they cannot cross.
I arrived on the eve of the elections with a mission: find out how the Israeli left is surviving, and see what the Palestinians they ostensibly want to help think of their efforts. I spoke to nearly 40 individuals who are struggling to move the status quo, particularly as it relates to Palestinians, in a more progressive direction. They were Jews and Arabs, people in Israel and people in the West Bank, folks who want one binational state and folks who want two separate states, Jerusalemites and Tel Avivians, Zionists and anti-Zionists, commentators and activists, immigrants and locals, lawyers and politicians, revolutionaries and gradualists, the religious and the secular — though I cannot claim to have a perfect cross section, I did my best to capture a broad swath of viewpoints and backgrounds. It was a cacophony of voices, many of them shouting down one another as much as, if not more than, their foes on the right. Precious few of them have concrete plans for fundamental change.
What I found in the Israeli left was not a unified movement. Rather, it was a collection of individuals who are motivated less by optimism that things can change than by what you might call inertia or you might call moral compulsion. I was particularly fascinated by the Zionists among them, who see the way the global left is turning on them and bristle at being held responsible for the failings of the people in power against whom they rail. Above all else, those liberal Zionists are people who, however calm they may appear on the exterior, are panicked about what might happen were they to give up their progressivism or their patriotism. You can argue that they’re complicit, that Zionism is bankrupt, that they had their chance and blew it. But it’s hard to fight the feeling that far worse things lie ahead should they lose even one inch to their opponents on Israel’s reactionary right.
All of that said, I heard compelling arguments about why people should give up on the Israeli left. Take, for example, the words of Yara Hawari. She is a 30-year-old Palestinian academic, activist, and resident of Ramallah, the West Bank city that acts as the seat of the neutered and authoritarian Palestinian Authority (PA). She has little confidence that the Palestinian-led PA, which was established in the mid-1990s to bring limited autonomy for Palestinians in certain occupied population centers, can bring about national liberation. But she is even less confident that the opposition in Israel proper, however much it may oppose reactionary Netanyahu-ism, can further her cause. Indeed, she thinks it’s probably best if the prime minister emerges victorious on the 9th.
“Benny Gantz is more dangerous than Netanyahu,” Hawari shouts to me over the din inside a hipster restaurant in Ramallah. “Look, the thing with Netanyahu is that everything is very obvious and up-front. I think the problem with Benny Gantz is that a lot of internationals in the international community are now beginning to ostracize Netanyahu because of his ugly alliances in Europe and around the world” — she’s referring to the PM’s recent, ostentatious moves to ally himself with illiberal strongmen like Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, the Philippines’ Rodrigo Duterte, and Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro — “but if they have Benny Gantz as prime minister, who maybe wasn’t so keen on these alliances or thought that it was more strategic to have the E.U. and the Western European countries on-side, I think that’s more dangerous. I would rather Israel was very honest and allied itself with the fascist states around the world — because it is a fascist state — than have it put on this façade of liberalism. I think that’s the most dangerous thing for Palestinians.”
Hawari may fear a Gantzian normalization, but she scoffs at the idea that those to the candidate’s left within mainstream Israeli political circles can — or even sincerely want to — allow the Palestinians to achieve national self-determination. “No Israeli government is going to deliver a Palestinian state,” she says. “I don’t think a center Israeli government or a left-wing government — although I struggle with calling anything in Israel ‘left wing’ — I don’t think they would ever deliver that.” Instead, what little hope she has comes from watching the growth of BDS in lefty circles outside Israel and the resulting rise in the belief that Israeli policy cannot be changed from within.
She is not alone in this view. “The Israeli left is nonexistent,” West Bank Palestinian author and activist Tareq Baconi tells me in a café during a torrential Ramallah downpour. “I cannot see what kind of reality could change that, or what kind of event would change that reality. There could be something that I don’t foresee, but unless something major happens, I don’t see how the Israeli political Establishment in the system can viably produce a Palestinian state or has any interest in producing a Palestinian state. What I think will happen is that we will have differences of how the occupation is managed.”
“I think the real game-changer is what happens abroad,” says Amjad Iraqi, a writer, activist, and Palestinian citizen of Israel, over cups of water on a hot day in the coastal, ethnically mixed Israeli city of Haifa. “At the moment, the only real resistance is coming from outside, the only resistance that the Israeli political leadership is really taking into account.”
To be sure, BDS promoters have seized the attention of the Israeli political Establishment and its backers in America. Indeed, the movement is perhaps their primary bête noire these days. Members of pro-BDS organizations have been barred from entering the Jewish state. The speeches at last month’s annual American Israel Public Affairs Committee conference were littered with BDS denunciations. Israel advocates regularly raise money in the name of combating BDS. An entire new wing of the Israeli government, the Ministry of Strategic Affairs, has devoted itself to attacking BDS efforts around the world. Even left-wing Israeli politicians decry BDS on the grounds that it delegitimizes Israel and undermines the belief that the country has a right to exist as Jewish state. But no matter: Most of the Palestinians I spoke to didn’t much care what Israeli progressives had to say, anyway.
Even Nawaja is unafraid to throw Israeli colleagues like Gvaryahu slightly under the bus. When I ask Nawaja whether he thinks change will come from inside or outside, he replies, “More from outside,” before slipping into Hebrew that Gvaryahu translates thusly: “He says that the solution has to come from both sides, but he thinks more from the outside. Because if Israelis will have to think twice before going abroad or if there will be pressure from the world, then Nasser thinks that could make Israelis think about this reality.”
This is the basis of the increasingly repeated argument in American leftist discourse that Israeli progressives are too comfortable with the oppression of Palestinians and that, even worse, their progressivism is making that oppression palatable — that Israeli lefties’ talk and small victories on matters of human rights allow the international community to sleep soundly without demanding the outright demolition of unjust sociopolitical structures. However, there is already a hard core of domestic Israeli radicals who don’t need reminding about the injustice and actually support making their home country a pariah. For them, they live in a nation gone wrong.
“Jewish supremacy is the only organizer or unifier of the Jewish society in Israel today,” says Orly Noy, an Iranian-Jewish writer, translator, and politician from the ostracized pro-Palestinian party Balad, over cigarettes outside a Jerusalem café. “That is the only thing. Nothing else. We are divided in every single parameter that you can think of except for this. I mean, 99.9 percent of the Jews in Israel deeply believe in the concept of Jewish supremacy. They won’t always define it in such a term. You believe inherently, without questioning it, that we should have extra national rights in this land. Of course, it is our” — that is, she and her small cadre of allies — “political obligation to continue speaking with the Jewish society in Israel. That’s the political and the moral thing to do. But I don’t have any hope that the change will come through the Jewish society itself.”
Noy balks on the question of whether or not she’d like to see a “two-state solution” (the creation of a separate Palestinian state in some combination of the West Bank, Gaza, and East Jerusalem) or a “one-state solution” (a single, Palestinian-majority state comprised of all the territories that Israel now exists in or controls). However, she emphasizes that Israeli Jews are already a minority in the lands of their extended sovereignty and sees catastrophe on the horizon if that is not reckoned with. “I do want to see a Jewish national existence here that will be sustainable,” she tells me. “And we are so blinded by the power now that Jews don’t even … It’s such a hypothetical question that it doesn’t even exist. But it will be very relevant pretty soon. We need to start thinking about these questions.”
Few in the mainstream Israeli Jewish left are doing so, at least openly. But on the fringe, there are other Cassandras. Inside a sparse gallery space tucked away in a run-down section of Tel Aviv, I share an hour of conversation with Debby Farber, an Israeli Jew who works for an organization called Zochrot — Hebrew for “remembering.” The group is dedicated to, as Farber puts it, “de-Zionization of our identity” through art and education, with a particular focus on spreading the word about Zionist discourse’s third rail: the Nakba.
The noun, meaning “catastrophe” in Arabic, is used by Palestinians and their advocates to describe the 1947-8 exodus of roughly 750,000 Palestinians from the territory that became Israel during the war in which the country was born. Israel’s defenders (and the textbooks read by the country’s children) often claim that the traumatic mass migration was chosen by Palestinians and therefore not the Zionists’ fault, but there’s a long-growing consensus among historians that the refugees were largely expelled by systematic Zionist force and threat. Public debate of the matter is nearly impossible within Israel, due both to social taboo and, since 2011, to a law that strips groups of public funding if they commemorate the Nakba. It’s no mystery why: If the refugees and their multitudinous descendants were allowed to return to Israel proper, as has been called for since a 1948 U.N. resolution to that effect, Jews would be demographically overwhelmed, making it impossible for the state to remain both Jewish and truly democratic. The very idea is a mortal threat. Though the Nakba’s original players are dead or dying, Palestinians mark it every year on the anniversary of Israel’s declaration of independence and its memory still threatens the foundations of the state.
Zochrot is a tiny organization that does not rely on Israeli government funding and defies convention by openly discussing the Nakba in art exhibitions, lesson plans, tours, and an app that maps out where obliterated Palestinian communities used to be. It is perhaps a credit to Israel’s free speech, however circumscribed, that Zochrot is allowed to exist for now. But Farber readily admits that her work puts her at odds with her own family and that it’s a constant uphill struggle to gain any traction with Jewish Israelis. “In many terms, we are anti-Zionist; we are saying that the Zionist movement was a settler-colonial movement,” she tells me. “Those liberals, leftists that you are talking about” — among Israeli Jews, that is — “are many times … Even though they consider themselves progressive, they are still not ready. It’s difficult for them to face what Zionism did.”
Stav Shaffir gives me the usual line, though I can’t really blame her. “When I think about Zionism, I think about our community being Israel — not only the only country in the world where the Jewish people can be a free nation in our own land, but also the place that is supposed to be a light,” she tells me over cappuccinos at a Tel Aviv restaurant, a silent assistant and a documentary film crew at her side. Someone’s shooting Shaffir for a doc about powerful women around the globe. But it’s unclear just how powerful she actually is.
Shaffir is a smart, charismatic, 33-year-old Parliament member for the erstwhile-socialist Labor Party, a political camp that dominated Israeli politics — for better and very often for worse — from the pre-state days until the election of the first conservative Parliament and PM in 1977. Labor and its predecessor party, MAPAI, committed their fair share of now-regretted acts in their day, from placing Palestinian citizens of Israel under military rule to systematically abusing dark-skinned “Mizrahi” Jews from Arab and Muslim lands — not to mention helping to birth the Jewish settlement enterprise in occupied Palestinian territory. Now, in a grim summary of the present situation, Labor has been struggling to even make it into double-digit percentages in the polls, and they’re not even that leftist on much anymore.
Nevertheless, Shaffir is the closest thing Labor has to a superstar. A former journalist who knows how to give a good quote in Hebrew or English, she first rose to prominence as a fresh-faced leader of 2011’s so-called Social Protests. The autumnal rallies were a cri de coeur against unjust economic factors for Israelis, but they famously avoided talking about the Palestinian Question, partly due to fear of alienating an Israeli Jewish public that had grown weary of the matter. She is now a member of the Israeli Parliament, the Knesset, and despite her lack of a stridently pro-Palestinian message, she’s been receiving death threats, allegedly from anti-Palestinian racists. Their content is a reminder of just how derided even the center-left is right now: “I will kill you, burn you, you bitch,” and “An electric shock to your leftist brain would help,” read two of the missives.
However, Shaffir is cheery when we meet, and she provides me with perfect examples of the verbiage that liberal Zionists from Pittsburgh to Petah Tikva employ when they talk about what Zionism means to them. “Zionism is hope,” she says with believable passion. “Zionism is making impossible things happen, like making Israel happen.” She condemns Netanyahu’s bigoted fear-mongering about Palestinians, but so too does she condemn pro-BDS leftists abroad: “When it comes to being truly progressive, it’s not about supporting BDS,” she tells me. “Being truly progressive is recognizing the right of Israel to exist, as well, and seeing the complexity of the conflict. Understanding that we need to have both sides happy with the solution and not only one side of the picture.”
A couple of days later, I speak to Tamar Zandberg, a politician who stands to Shaffir’s left as head of the Meretz (“Vigor”) Party, in her spartan Tel Aviv office. She, too, aims for the stars when I ask what Zionism means to her: “We believe that, in 2019, that means ensuring our sustainability in a democracy for all,” Zandberg says in her calming alto. “Peace. That means ending the occupation, a two-state solution, and a Palestinian state next to Israel. Pushing back on trends trying to divide us, to narrow democracy, to divide Jews and Arabs. To fight conservative trends, like chauvinism.”
There was a time when this self-conception of liberal Zionism was prominent in the Israel conversation, especially among American Jews. There was a belief that the socialist values of the kibbutz and the generosity of the Jewish spirit were Israel’s foundation stones. In the days before social media, the Palestinian cause’s message was easier to miss. And if there had to be occasional violence and discrimination, well, these generations of Jews had living memory of the Holocaust and/or the threat of Israel’s annihilation in multiple wars — they could forgive a little rule-breaking in the name of saving millions of lives. Though they’d admit faults in their own side, liberal Zionists increasingly blamed the right wing for betraying the Zionist revolution after the 1977 conservative electoral victory. Liberal Zionists have become, in their own way, a conservative group insofar as their most vocal advocates spend a considerable amount of time urging the country to go back to its perceived roots of liberation and justice.
This does not mean liberal Zionists are blind. One of the things you find when you spend time with the smartest of them is how open-eyed they can be about the skeletons in their ideological basement. During my trip, one liberal Zionist took me to a pair of radical Palestinian bookstores in East Jerusalem and recommended a bunch of anti-Zionist tomes about Israeli crimes. One of the most accomplished American liberal Zionists I’ve ever met has regaled me with stories about empathetic personal meetings with Palestinian leader and violent svengali Yasser Arafat. I went to a screening of a documentary about the early Israeli government’s horrific mistreatment of Mizrahi Jews; afterward, during a Q&A with the lefty producer of the film, he told us he was fully aware of how awful Israel has been in the past, then threw up his arms and said, “But don’t get me wrong: I’m a Zionist.” At the end of the day, in spite of everything, they’d all prefer a world with some kind of Israel in it rather than one with none at all.
This bifurcated — some might say oxymoronic — desire to both defend Israel and instill it with progressive values alienates detractors on the left and the right. Liberal Zionism’s champions are people who, for the most part, are fully aware of how desperately hard it is to move the Israeli agenda in a leftward direction right now, especially on the Palestinian Question. “Occupation, for Israel, is …” begins Ran Cohen, founder of an activist collective called the Democratic Bloc, speaking in a sparse conference room in Tel Aviv. “For most Israelis, it’s boring. It’s boring! It’s old news. They’re not aware of what’s going on. They are tired of hearing about settlements. The attempt to connect the occupation with poverty, or with issues of economical issues and so on, succeeded in a very minor way, as I see it. We need to reinvent ourselves and the discourse.” Nevertheless, Cohen still dreams of a future where Jewishness and democracy go hand in hand: “The Jewish nation is not afraid of a long wait,” he says with a smile. “I don’t want to give up.”
Of course, the leftist counterargument here is that Cohen’s ability to wait is a luxury while, say, the nearly 2 million blockaded Gazans just a few miles south seethe in an open-air prison that is predicted to become unlivable by the end of next year. The nonstop moral crises mean gradualism loses a significant amount of its appeal in discussions of the region. Plus, there’s the question of what, exactly, liberal Zionism’s beloved two-state solution could even look like.
It would be tremendously difficult and politically costly to order a mass evacuation of any parts of the West Bank. What’s more, Israeli Jews understandably lose sleep over the idea of a Palestinian state that could arm itself against Israel. They see how Israel pulled its troops and settlements out of the interior of Gaza in 2005 and was eventually faced with a government there controlled by the militant Islamist party Hamas (though that story is much more complicated than it may seem), which has repeatedly fired rockets into Israel. They think such things could happen in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, too. Historically, even when Israeli governments have made overtures about allowing the creation of a Palestinian state, they usually come with enormous caveats like full demilitarization of that new state, territorial carve-ups that allow Jewish settlements to remain in seas of Palestinian territory, and a permanent Israeli military presence on the theoretical country’s border with Jordan. And yet, even that sort of “state-minus,” as Netanyahu has memorably called it, is too much for many of today’s Israeli voters to feel safe with.
On top of all that, there’s the fact that the Palestinians are divided between Hamas in Gaza and the late Arafat’s Fatah movement in the West Bank, meaning there’s no credibly unified Palestinian entity to do business with. With the expansion of the Israeli settlement project, we’ve entered a de facto and wholly unequal one-state reality for the time being. The status quo has made it increasingly standard among international lefties to declare the two-state solution dead. They are joined in this by right-wing expansionists. The debate among those two extremes is simply about whether the single state should be democratic or definitionally Jewish — i.e. whether Palestinians there should be granted the vote and other political rights. A plurality of Israeli citizens still want a two-state solution, but polls show a majority of them grimly conceding that such a deal isn’t viable right now.
It is against this backdrop that we must ask: What on earth can Israel’s Zionist lefties accomplish? I posed this question to every one of them that I met and was struck by a subtle philosophical bifurcation that has bedeviled Zionism since at least the establishment of Israel: the difference between individual rights and national rights. The former are things like free movement, legal redress, and freedom from physical abuse; the latter include self-determination for identity populations and peace between said populations. Most of the left-leaning Zionist activists I spoke to were excited to talk about the ways they are pushing for individual rights, be they for people of Israel or those of the West Bank and Gaza. I spoke to human-rights lawyers and NGO workers who tout their accomplishments in saving and changing the lives of individuals and families. They think they can keep that up in the future.
Trouble is, you can make the argument that the pursuit of individual rights is merely a way to make the deprivation of national rights for Palestinians in the occupied territories tolerable enough that it can persist. This is where those accusations of making the system palatable come in. Even when the Zionist lefties I spoke to were polite, it was clear that they truly hate being lectured by outsiders about whether their work perpetuates occupation and repression. I sit in the Tel Aviv offices of the U.S.-based “pro-Israel, pro-peace” organization J Street and watch as a gathering of Israeli lefties from various allied organizations grows increasingly incensed over the stigma attached to their work by international leftists.
“I meet three or four times a week [with] groups for the U.S. or Canada or Australia, and the second question they ask is about pinkwashing,” says Chen Arieli, chairwoman of the Israeli LGBTQ task force known as the Aguda. “Pinkwashing” is a pejorative term referring to the accusation that the Israeli government and groups like the Aguda present Israel as LGBTQ-friendly in order to distract from the oppression of Palestinians. “I’m so annoyed by it because … I’m pinkwashing? I’m pinkwashing? I’m volunteering for 15 years in my arena and promoting civil rights. I’m answering those phone calls at 2 a.m. trying to find a Palestinian asylum seeker that’s running from Ramallah because his father beat him up because he’s gay. It’s illegal for me to help him and I can go to jail, but I help him. To blame the activist in the left and the civil society for pinkwashing is like peeing on the wrong tree. Sorry.”
Then Liat Schlesinger, executive director of lefty think tank Molad, pipes up. “I think the worst thing is not taking our analysis,” she says. “This is a bit patronizing. What makes you think that you understand Israeli politics better than the forces in Israel?” She has no patience for foreign leftists who call for a single, binational state: “Then Israelis and Palestinians will kill each other, and there will be a religious fight between them. We can look like Syria or Bosnia. It’s not attracting.”
Then Udi Volkov, an activist and former adviser to erstwhile peace negotiator Tzipi Livni, chimes in. “It’s this high and mighty, ‘You’re not doing enough for the occupation, you’re not doing enough,’ especially from young American Jews,” he says. “I get it! I completely get it.” He accepts that such Jews will often back BDS and have little faith in — or even knowledge of — his efforts. He just wants empathy: “I ask them to understand me a bit better.”
A few days later, I sit outdoors at a Jaffa café at sunset with Raluca Ganea, executive director and co-founder of the community-action and anti-occupation group Zazim. I present her with the stance of international leftists who have given up on their Israeli counterparts and the dream of the two-state solution. “It’s very privileged,” she says, throwing the terminology of modern social justice back at her imagined audience. “It’s very easy to stand in another country with another citizenship, being very safe where you are, and say, ‘You’re not worth my time.’ We don’t have your privilege. I can’t just leave everything and go live somewhere else because I don’t want to be part of this. This is the only place I have. I can only try to make it better and I really need your help.”
That notion is what I can’t stop thinking about from the confines of my Brooklyn apartment as I recover from jet lag and grapple with what I heard in the Holy Land. As is true when it comes to virtually every big question about Israel, I’m presented with a series of deeply flawed options. Do I advocate ostracization of the country’s Zionist left as a way to, I don’t know, push them to try even harder to resolve the Palestinian Question? Or do I endorse these comrades in arms, even if I don’t know whether or not I share their core ideology when it comes to the Zionist project? I don’t feel I have strong standing to pass judgment, given that I don’t live in the region and will face no consequences for titanic changes there. I bristle when leftist individuals and organizations say Israel/Palestine is simple. To that claim, I cannot help but say: morally simple, perhaps (perhaps); but simple to resolve? Are you high?
I ultimately have to turn inward and ask what I, as a progressive, would hope for from the world if I were the one living in a pariah state (which is, of course, no longer a wholly abstract question). I fully recognize that what the United States does is often fundamentally immoral, both to individuals and whole nations. So, too, do I recognize, given the incomprehensible violence done to this territory’s indigenous population, that there’s a solid argument to be made that my own government is illegitimate. But my country exists, and if the system is totally overthrown, I fear that the chaos that comes in its place may be even worse, including (perhaps especially) for vulnerable populations. I’m not prepared to stop trying to change things from within and I would hope that those abroad who share my values would have my back. I wouldn’t blame them if they abandoned me, so I would only ask them to take a leap of faith and support my efforts.
Who am I to deny the Israeli domestic opposition the same? I have to believe there’s a midway point between BDS and blind loyalty; a position, however awkward, that calls for broad-based external pressure on the structures of Israeli power, especially as they relate to Palestinians, but allows for the support of domestic opposition, complicit though it may sometimes be. Maybe I’m wrong and no such position exists. But I cannot bring myself to feel another way right now.
April 9 will not be a good day for the Jews and Palestinians between the river and the sea who want to see human rights flourish in the land they both call home. Perhaps Netanyahu will be unseated, perhaps not. Perhaps his unseating would be a good thing for the cause, perhaps not. I keep coming back to the words of a man hardly associated with the Middle East. As I wandered the streets of Tel Aviv on my final day there, I was surprised to find myself ruminating on Langston Hughes’s 1935 poem about the compromised society to which I’d be flying in a few hours, “Let America Be America Again.” Rolling Zionism around in my mind, I thought of Hughes’s lines about how America’s hypocritical slogans of liberty had been used in the service of destruction and oppression. And yet, he believed that those dreams, if reclaimed and actually lived up to, could still be put into the service of liberation:
O, let America be America again—The land that never has been yet—And yet must be—the land where every man is free.
And:
O, yes,I say it plain,America never was America to me,And yet I swear this oath—America will be!
So, too, is it with liberal Zionism in the Holy Land. For many people, Israel never was Israel. The dream has, in so many ways, been a nightmare. But as a Jew, I believe I am obligated to yearn for the messianic age, when all the world will be redeemed. That will mean the creation of a Land of Israel that uplifts rather than burdens. I look at liberal Zionism and am inspired by the rhetoric of balancing Jewish self-protection with human rights and democratic liberties. At the very least, I see how hard they are pushing to be the last line of defense against greater bigotry and deprivation of rights. I can only hope that Israel’s liberal Zionism will somehow be repurposed, reimagined in a way that recognizes its predecessor’s audacious achievements while abandoning its deficiencies. That true solidarity with Palestinian liberation can be found among Israeli patriots. That thesis and antithesis will, in defiance of doubt, become synthesis. That the Zion that never has been yet is the Zion that will be.
Abraham Riesman



Apr. 5, 2019
Some NYC Pre-K Teachers Can’t Make Ends Meet. Now They’re Preparing to Strike.

For some New York City children, preschool might not be in session on May 2. “In solidarity with their union’s decision to demonstrate against unfair salaries funded by the City of New York, our employees may not report to work on this day,” Michelle Paige, the associate executive director of University Settlement’s early childhood education division, wrote in a letter to parents on Friday. “Despite University Settlement’s advocacy efforts, the early childhood employees are still fighting for salaries that support their professional dedication to the education and care of our children.”
The potential strike has been in the works for weeks. University Settlement’s letter follows March strike authorization votes by members of AFSCME District Council 1707; the union represents educators employed by community-run day cares and preschools. “They need to be paid what they’re worth,” Kim Medina, the district council’s executive director, told WNYC on April 2.
Though the city doesn’t directly pay these educators, it does provide funding for them in its budget. A strike, then, is a headache Mayor Bill de Blasio doesn’t want. The mayor just brandished his pro-labor credentials on Thursday, when he criticized the management of BuzzFeed News for standing up its staff union at a scheduled meeting.
Universal pre-kindergarten is one of de Blasio’s signature programs, and it has extra significance now, amidst reports that the mayor is seriously considering a run for president. Expanding public access to free pre-k helped the mayor polish his reputation for progressive politics. If he runs for president, the program would likely become a key selling point for his candidacy; not only does he need the program to work, he needs it to work without engendering much controversy. Though the program accomplished the mayor’s basic goal of getting more children in pre-k and now pre-3 education, teachers in community-run preschools say it hasn’t been quite as beneficial for them, and controversy may soon become unavoidable.
DC 1707’s demands center on the issue of pay parity. Teachers employed by community-run preschools and day cares say they’re getting paid less than their peers in public schools, even though they’re part of the same pre-k program. According to WNYC, educators at community-run programs in NYC make $15,000 to $30,000 less than comparably-trained educators in public schools. One teacher told Chalkbeat.org in March that she sometimes skips lunch because she can’t afford to eat, and that despite a decade of work experience, she makes barely over $15 an hour. These low salaries are in keeping with national trends. Though the cost of child care is steadily rising, one state-by-state analysis released in 2018 revealed that 86 percent of infants and toddler teachers make less than $15 an hour, Education Week reported at the time.
The University Settlement letter urges parents to contact city council members and ask them to include pay parity in future budgets.
Sarah Jones



Apr. 5, 2019
De Blasio Stubbornly Moves Toward Presidential Race That Could Humiliate New York

The human ego is a powerful beast that grows luxuriant in the soul of career politicians. We are seeing an egregious example in the proto-presidential campaign of New York mayor Bill de Blasio, who, according to the New York Times, is bulling ahead toward a formal candidacy despite multiple indicators that it’s a very bad idea.
There have been so signs of any craving for a de Blasio candidacy on the trail so far. His first two recent trips to Iowa have been, in a word, fiascoes (his first, last December, was marked by NYPD protests, and during the second, in February, he was stranded in a blizzard at a Super 8 motel and dined on a gas-station burrito). He hasn’t been listed in most 2020 polls, and his peak performance in any has been a booming one percent.
It’s hard to discern any path to the White House for Hizzoner. Let’s say he can revive his sagging reputation as a fighting progressive. Is he really going to challenge Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, and Kamala Harris in that “lane”? None of the early states would strike you as de Blasio Country, unless New York chooses to have a relatively early primary next year (it was in April in 2016, and the legislature has yet to set a 2020 date). But then again, it’s not like New York is a hotbed of BDB ’20 enthusiasm. Au contraire, as the Daily News noted after a new Quinnipiac poll of his constituents was released this very week:
As de Blasio himself ruefully observed when asked about the poll: “I’m glad I could unify the people of New York City.”
Still, he seems determined to plow ahead:
De Blasio’s belief that this will make him the object of serious rather than derisive talk may be a throwback to the days when mayors of New York (and also governor of the Empire State) were considered ex officio presidential timber. The last mayor who made the mistake of running for president, of course, was Rudy Giuliani, who quickly crashed and burned in 2008 after leading in a lot of early polls. De Blasio’s aspirations are reminiscent of those of a different two-term mayor, John Lindsay, who, after a narrow reelection win in a three-way race in 1969, abandoned the Republican Party and ran for president as a Democrat in 1972. He had good looks, a liberal reputation, and some high-life political talent (former Bobby Kennedy hands Jeff Greenfield and Jerry Bruno were onboard), but finished sixth in two primaries and ninth in another and dropped out. He thought Big Apple fame meant the kind of glamour the benighted rest of the country craved, and found out otherwise.
Even beyond de Blasio’s city, the national political influence of New York has declined as steadily as the state’s electoral votes (41 when Lindsey ran, 29 today, and likely 27 after the next reapportionment). Want to stump even political junkies with a trivia question? Ask them the identity of the last New York resident to serve as president of the United States. The answer: that famous Gotham favorite, Richard M. Nixon, who moved to New York after his humiliating defeat in the 1962 California governor’s race.
Bill de Blasio might want to scout out a new home, too, if he persists in running for president and humiliates his own state and city.
Ed Kilgore



Apr. 5, 2019
Joe Manchin Can’t Be Democrats’ Only Strategy for Holding West Virginia

One of the most conservative Democrats in the Senate is considering a run for governor. Politico reported on Friday that Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia may challenge his state’s Republican governor, Jim Justice, in 2020. “I think about it every minute of every day. Now, thinking about it and doing it are two different things,” he said. “I’ll make a decision this fall sometime. I don’t think there’s any hurry at all.”
The news that a gubernatorial race is even on Manchin’s mind will likely disturb other members of his party. Democrats face a difficult path to retaking the Senate in 2020, and Manchin’s seat is pivotal; that’s the national party’s stated rationale for its tolerance of his conservative voting record. West Virginia is just too right wing, and Manchin is the party’s only hope. Governor Manchin means a new Republican senator. That’s probably true, but regardless of Manchin’s next move, sooner or later Democrats will have to confront their defeatism about West Virginia and other conservative states.
Manchin previously served as the state’s governor, and as gubernatorial candidates go, he’d probably prove a safer bet than his party’s previous choice: Justice, who flipped to the GOP after taking office. (That maneuver did not earn him the loyalty of the state Republican Party. This week the Kanawha County Republican Executive Committee passed a no-confidence resolution targeting Justice, who recently refused to sign a GOP bill that would have created some charter schools in the state.) Manchin also knows how to win a statewide race in a right-wing state, and there’s no question that he would be preferable to Justice, or a Republican to Justice’s right. Though Manchin wouldn’t move the state as far to the left as some would like, a Democratic governor who actually stays in the party could help block the GOP’s legislative priorities in an increasingly far-right state.
Nevertheless, the Democratic Party’s chances in West Virginia don’t look great. The state remains broadly supportive of President Donald Trump. Even if Manchin did manage to win in 2020, another Democrat — whether they’re a progressive populist or a conservative Democrat in Manchin’s mold — would likely run into trouble in the next Senate race. That gamble isn’t one the party can afford right now, with Alabama senator Doug Jones’s seat in real jeopardy too. As Politico points out, Manchin defeated his Republican challenger in the 2018 midterms by just three points.
But there’s reason to think the state is changing — perhaps not in time for a Manchin gubernatorial run to do anything but deliver a Senate seat into Republican hands, but down the road, if the Democratic Party actually treats the state as if it’s something other than a place where its electoral dreams go to wither. As conservative as West Virginia is, it’s not marching in place. Democratic candidates in the state’s three congressional districts far outperformed Hillary Clinton’s showing against Trump. Democrat Talley Sergent improved 14 points on Clinton in the state’s Second Congressional District; in its Third Congressional District, Democrat Richard Ojeda improved on Clinton by 20 points. Kendra Fershee, in the First Congressional District, outperformed Clinton by eight points. Although these results aren’t proof that a Democrat could successfully keep Manchin’s seat in party hands, they do provide some reason to think that the situation is not as hopeless as conventional wisdom dictates.
The state can move, for the right candidate. It’s up to the party to boost its recruitment efforts, not just for congressional candidates but for local races, too, to build up its backbench. National Democrats can’t rely on Joe Manchin forever